::decision_cite:: 21-954
::decision_name::  Biden v. Texas
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: Roberts
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before
publication in the preliminary print of the United States
Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions,
Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that
corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to
press.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 21–954

															_________________

															JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR., PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
et al., PETITIONERS v. TEXAS, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the fifth circuit

															[June 30, 2022]

															Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court.

															In January 2019, the Department of Homeland Security—under the
administration of President Trump—established the Migrant
Protection Protocols. That program provided for the return to
Mexico of non-Mexican aliens who had been detained attempting to
enter the United States illegally from Mexico. On Inauguration Day
2021, the new administration of President Biden announced that the
program would be suspended the next day, and later that year sought
to terminate it. The District Court and the Court of Appeals,
however, held that doing so would violate the Immigration and
Nationality Act, concluding that the return policy was mandatory so
long as illegal entrants were being released into the United
States. The District Court also held that the attempted rescission
of the program was inadequately explained in violation of the
Administrative Procedure Act. While its appeal was pending, the
Government took new action to terminate the policy with a more
detailed explanation. But the Court of Appeals held that this new
action was not separately reviewable final agency action under the
Administrative Procedure Act.

															The questions presented are whether the Government’s rescission
of the Migrant Protection Protocols violated the Immigration and
Nationality Act and whether the Government’s second termination of
the policy was a valid final agency action.

															I

															A

															On December 20, 2018, then-Secretary of Homeland Security
Kirstjen Nielsen announced a new program called Remain in Mexico,
also known as the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP). MPP was
created in response to an immigration surge at the country’s
southern border, and a resulting “humanitarian and border security
crisis” in which federal immigration officials were encountering
approximately 2,000 inadmissible aliens each day. 554 F. Supp.
3d 818, 831 (ND Tex. 2021). MPP provided that certain non-Mexican
nationals arriving by land from Mexico would be returned to Mexico
to await the results of their removal proceedings under8
U. S. C. §1229a. On the same day that Secretary Nielsen
announced the program, the Government of Mexico agreed that it
would cooperate in administering it, on a temporary basis.

															MPP was implemented pursuant to express congressional
authorization in the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), which
provides that “[i]n the case of an alien . . . who is
arriving on land (whether or not at a designated port of arrival)
from a foreign territory contiguous to the United States, the
Attorney General may return the alien to that territory pending a
proceeding under section 1229a of this title.”66Stat.163, as added
and amended,8 U. S. C. §1225(b)(2)(C).[1] Prior to the initiation of MPP, the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) and its predecessor agency had “primarily
used [§1225(b)(2)(C)] on an ad-hoc basis to return certain Mexican
and Canadian nationals” arriving at ports of entry. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 273a, n. 12.

															A separate provision of the same section of the INA states that
if “an alien seeking admission is not clearly and beyond a doubt
entitled to be admitted, the alien shall be detained for a
proceeding under section 1229a of this title.” §1225(b)(2)(A). Due
to consistent and significant funding shortfalls, however, DHS has
never had “sufficient detention capacity to maintain in custody
every single person described in section 1225.” Id., at
323a. In light of that fact, the Trump administration chose to
implement MPP in part so that “[c]ertain aliens attempting to enter
the U. S. illegally or without documentation, including those
who claim asylum, will no longer be released into the country,
where they often fail to file an asylum application and/or
disappear before an immigration judge can determine the merits of
any claim.” 554 F. Supp. 3d, at 832.

															In January 2019, DHS began implementing MPP, initially in San
Diego, California, then in El Paso, Texas, and Calexico,
California, and then nationwide. By December 31, 2020, DHS had
enrolled 68,039 aliens in the program.

															Following the change in Presidential administrations, however,
the Biden administration sought to terminate the program. On
January 20, 2021, the Acting Secretary of Homeland Security wrote
that “[e]ffective January 21, 2021, the Department will suspend new
enrollments in [MPP] pending further review of the program. Aliens
who are not already enrolled in MPP should be processed under other
existing legal authorities.” Id., at 836. President Biden
also issued Executive Order No. 14010, which directed the new
Secretary of Homeland Security, Alejandro N. Mayorkas, to “promptly
review and determine whether to terminate or modify the [MPP]
program.” 86 Fed. Reg. 8269 (2021).

															On June 1, 2021, Secretary Mayorkas issued a memorandum
officially terminating MPP (the June 1 Memorandum). In that
memorandum, the Secretary noted his determination “that MPP [d]oes
not adequately or sustainably enhance border management in such a
way as to justify the program’s extensive operational burdens and
other shortfalls.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 351a. He also emphasized
that, since its inception, MPP had “played an outsized role in
[DHS’s] engagement with the Government of Mexico,” given the
“significant attention that it draws away from other elements that
necessarily must be more central to the bilateral relationship.”
Id., at 357a. For those and other reasons, the Secretary
announced that he was “by this memorandum terminating the MPP
program,” and “direct[ed] DHS personnel to take all appropriate
actions to terminate MPP, including taking all steps necessary to
rescind implementing guidance and other directives or policy
guidance issued to implement the program.” Id., at
348a–349a.

															B

															On April 13, 2021, the States of Texas and Missouri
(respondents) initiated this lawsuit in the Northern District of
Texas against Secretary Mayorkas and others. Respondents’ initial
complaint challenged the Acting Secretary’s January 20 suspension
of new enrollments in MPP, but following the June 1 Memorandum,
they amended their complaint to challenge the Secretary’s June 1
rescission of the entire program. The amended complaint asserted
that the June 1 Memorandum violated the INA and the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA),5 U. S. C. §701 et seq.,
and sought preliminary and permanent injunctive relief, declaratory
relief, and vacatur of the rescission pursuant to the APA.

															The District Court conducted a one-day bench trial and entered
judgment for respondents. The court first concluded that
terminating MPP would violate the INA. It reasoned that section
1225 of the INA “provides the government two options”: mandatory
detention pursuant to section 1225(b)(2)(A) or contiguous-territory
return pursuant to section 1225(b)(2)(C). 554 F. Supp. 3d, at
852. Because the Government was unable to meet its detention
obligations under section 1225(b)(2)(A) due to resource
constraints, the court concluded, “terminating MPP necessarily
leads to the systemic violation of Section 1225 as aliens are
released into the United States.” Ibid. Second, the District
Court found that the agency failed to engage in reasoned
decisionmaking and therefore acted arbitrarily and capriciously in
violation of the APA. Id., at 847–851.

															Based on these conclusions, the District Court “vacated [the
June 1 Memorandum] in its entirety and remanded to DHS for further
consideration.” Id., at 857 (boldface and capitalization
omitted). And it imposed a nationwide injunction ordering the
Government to “enforce and implement MPP in good faith until
such a time as it has been lawfully rescinded in compliance with
the APA and until such a time as the federal government has
sufficient detention capacity to detain all aliens subject to
mandatory detention under [section 1225] without releasing any
aliens because of a lack of detention resources.”
Ibid. (emphasis in original).

															The Government appealed and sought a stay of the injunction,
which the District Court and the Court of Appeals each denied. The
Government then applied to this Court for a stay. The Court denied
the application, finding that the Government “had failed to show a
likelihood of success on the claim that the [June 1 Memorandum] was
not arbitrary and capricious.” 594 U. S. ___ (2021). The Court
did not address the District Court’s interpretation of the INA.

															The parties proceeded to briefing in the Court of Appeals. While
the Government’s appeal was pending, however, Secretary Mayorkas
“considered anew whether to maintain, terminate, or modify MPP in
various ways.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 286a. On September 29, 2021,
the Secretary publicly announced his “inten[tion] to issue in the
coming weeks a new memorandum terminating [MPP].” 20 F. 4th 928,
954 (CA5 2021). The Government then moved to hold the appeal in
abeyance pending the Secretary’s formal decision, but the Court of
Appeals denied the motion.

															On October 29, the Secretary released a four-page memorandum
that again announced the termination of MPP, along with a 39-page
addendum explaining his reasons for doing so (the October 29
Memoranda). As the Secretary explained, this new assessment of MPP
“examined considerations that the District Court determined were
insufficiently addressed in the June 1 memo, including claims that
MPP discouraged unlawful border crossings, decreased the filing of
non-meritorious asylum claims, and facilitated more timely relief
for asylum seekers, as well as predictions that termination of MPP
would lead to a border surge, cause [DHS] to fail to comply with
alleged detention obligations under the [INA], impose undue costs
on states, and put a strain on U. S.-Mexico relations.” App.
to Pet. for Cert. 259a–260a.

															The Secretary acknowledged what he called “the strongest
argument in favor of retaining MPP: namely, the significant
decrease in border encounters following the determination to
implement MPP across the southern border.” Id., at 261a. But
he nonetheless concluded that the program’s “benefits do not
justify the costs, particularly given the way in which MPP detracts
from other regional and domestic goals, foreign-policy objectives,
and domestic policy initiatives that better align with this
Administration’s values.” Ibid. Finally, the Secretary once
again noted that “[e]fforts to implement MPP have played a
particularly outsized role in diplomatic engagements with Mexico,
diverting attention from more productive efforts to fight
transnational criminal and smuggling networks and address the root
causes of migration.” Id., at 262a.

															In light of those conclusions, the Secretary announced that he
was once again “hereby terminating MPP.” Id., at 263a. He
explained that DHS would “continue complying with the [District
Court’s] injunction requiring good-faith implementation and
enforcement of MPP.” Id., at 264a. But he noted that “the
termination of MPP” would be “implemented as soon as practicable
after a final judicial decision to vacate” that injunction.
Ibid. The Government then moved to vacate the injunction on
the ground that the October 29 Memoranda had superseded the June 1
Memorandum, but the Court of Appeals denied the motion.

															The Court of Appeals instead affirmed the District Court’s
judgment in full. With respect to the INA question, the Court of
Appeals agreed with the District Court’s analysis of the relevant
provisions. That is, the court explained, section 1225(b)(2)(A)
“sets forth a general, plainly obligatory rule: detention for
aliens seeking admission,” while section 1225(b)(2)(C) “authorizes
contiguous-territory return as an alternative.” 20 F. 4th, at 996.
Accordingly, the Court of Appeals reasoned, “DHS is violating (A)’s
mandate, refusing to avail itself of (C)’s authorized alternative,
and then complaining that it doesn’t like its options.”
Ibid., n. 18.

															The Court of Appeals also held that “[t]he October 29 Memoranda
did not constitute a new and separately reviewable ‘final agency
action.’ ” Id., at 951. The Court of Appeals
distinguished “DHS’s June 1 decision to terminate MPP,” which it
claimed “had legal effect,” from the June 1 Memorandum, the October
29 Memoranda, and “any other subsequent memos,” which it held
“simply explained DHS’s decision.” Ibid. The Court of
Appeals then criticized the Government for proceeding “without a
hint of an intention to put the Termination Decision back on the
chopping block and rethink things,” and for ultimately “just
further defend[ing] what it had previously decided.” Id., at
955. And the Court of Appeals drew a dichotomy between taking new
agency action and appealing an adverse decision, asserting that
“DHS chose not to take a new agency action” but “instead chose to
notice an appeal and defend its Termination Decision in our court.”
Id., at 941.

															We granted certiorari, 595 U. S. ___ (2022), and expedited
consideration of this appeal at the Government’s request.

															II

															We begin with jurisdiction. The Government contends that the
injunction the District Court entered was barred by8
U. S. C. §1252(f )(1). That provision reads as
follows:

															“Regardless of the nature of the action or claim or of the
identity of the party or parties bringing the action, no court
(other than the Supreme Court) shall have jurisdiction or authority
to enjoin or restrain the operation of [8 U. S. C.
§§1221–1232], other than with respect to the application of such
provisions to an individual alien against whom proceedings under
[those provisions] have been initiated.”

															As we recently held in Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez,
596 U. S. ___ (2022), section 1252(f )(1) “generally
prohibits lower courts from entering injunctions that order federal
officials to take or to refrain from taking actions to enforce,
implement, or otherwise carry out the specified statutory
provisions.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 5). The District
Court’s injunction in this case violated that provision. But that
fact simply presents us with the following question: whether
section 1252(f )(1) deprives this Court of jurisdiction
to reach the merits of an appeal, where the lower court entered a
form of relief barred by that provision. See Steel Co. v.
Citizens for Better Environment,523 U.S.
83, 95 (1998) (“Every federal appellate court has an obligation
to satisfy itself not only of its own jurisdiction, but also that
of the lower courts in a cause under review, even though the
parties are prepared to concede it.” (internal quotation marks and
alterations omitted)).

															Absent section 1252(f )(1), the District Court clearly had
federal question jurisdiction over respondents’ suit, which
asserted claims arising under two federal statutes, the INA and the
APA. See28 U. S. C. §1331 (“The district courts shall
have original jurisdiction of all civil actions arising under the
Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States.”). The
question, then, is whether section 1252(f )(1) strips the
lower courts of subject matter jurisdiction over these claims. The
parties agree that the answer to that question is no, and so do we.
That is because section 1252(f )(1) withdraws a district
court’s “jurisdiction or authority” to grant a particular form of
relief. It does not deprive the lower courts of all subject matter
jurisdiction over claims brought under sections 1221 through 1232
of the INA.

															The text of the provision makes that clear. Section
1252(f )(1) deprives courts of the power to issue a specific
category of remedies: those that “enjoin or restrain the operation
of ” the relevant sections of the statute. A limitation on
subject matter jurisdiction, by contrast, restricts a court’s
“power to adjudicate a case.” United States v.
Cotton,535 U.S.
625, 630 (2002). Section 1252(f )(1) bears no indication
that lower courts lack power to hear any claim brought under
sections 1221 through 1232. If Congress had wanted the provision to
have that effect, it could have said so in words far simpler than
those that it wrote. But Congress instead provided that lower
courts would lack jurisdiction to “enjoin or restrain the operation
of ” the relevant provisions, and it included that language in
a provision whose title—“Limit on injunctive relief ”—makes
clear the narrowness of its scope.

															A second feature of the text of section 1252(f )(1) leaves
no doubt that this Court has jurisdiction: the parenthetical
explicitly preserving this Court’s power to enter injunctive
relief. See §1252(f )(1) (“[N]o court (other than the Supreme
Court) shall have jurisdiction or authority . . .”). If
section 1252(f )(1) deprived lower courts of subject matter
jurisdiction to adjudicate any non-individual claims under sections
1221 through 1232, no such claims could ever arrive at this Court,
rendering the provision’s specific carveout for Supreme Court
injunctive relief nugatory. Indeed, that carveout seems directed at
precisely the question before us here: whether section
1252(f )(1)’s “[l]imit on injunctive relief ” has any
consequence for the jurisdiction of this Court. Congress took pains
to answer that question in the negative. Interpreting section
1252(f )(1) to deprive this Court of jurisdiction under these
circumstances would therefore fail to “give effect, if possible, to
every clause and word of [the] statute.” Williams v.
Taylor,529 U.S.
362, 404 (2000).[2]

															Statutory structure confirms our conclusion. Elsewhere in
section 1252, where Congress intended to deny subject matter
jurisdiction over a particular class of claims, it did so
unambiguously. Section 1252(a)(2), for instance, is entitled
“Matters not subject to judicial review” and provides that “no
court shall have jurisdiction to review” several categories of
decisions, such as “any final order of removal against an alien who
is removable by reason of having committed a criminal
offense. . . .” (Emphasis added.) Congress could
easily have added one more item to this list: any action taken
pursuant to sections 1221 through 1232. Or it could have worded
section 1252(f )(1) similarly to the immediately adjacent
section 1252(g), which provides that “no court shall have
jurisdiction to hear any cause or claim by or on behalf of any
alien arising from the decision or action by the Attorney General
to commence proceedings, adjudicate cases, or execute removal
orders against [the alien].” (Emphasis added.) But Congress did
neither. Instead, it constructed a carefully worded provision
depriving the lower courts of power to “enjoin or restrain the
operation of ” certain sections of the statute, and it
entitled that provision a “[l]imit on injunctive relief.”

															Our prior cases have already embraced this straightforward
conclusion. Most relevantly, the Court previously encountered a
virtually identical situation in Nielsen v. Preap,
586 U. S. ___ (2019). There, as here, the plaintiffs sought
declaratory as well as injunctive relief in their complaint, and
there, as here, the District Court awarded only the latter. Yet
this Court proceeded to reach the merits of the suit,
notwithstanding the District Court’s apparent violation of section
1252(f )(1), by reasoning that “[w]hether the [District]
[C]ourt had jurisdiction to enter such an injunction is irrelevant
because the District Court had jurisdiction to entertain the
plaintiffs’ request for declaratory relief.” Id., at ___–___
(Alito, J., joined by Roberts, C. J., and Kavanaugh, J.) (slip op.,
at 8–9); see also Jennings v. Rodriguez, 583
U. S. ___, ___ (2018) (Breyer, J., joined by Ginsburg and
Sotomayor, JJ., dissenting) (slip op., at 31) (concluding that “a
court could order declaratory relief ” notwithstanding section
1252(f )(1)). Our disposition in Preap is inconsistent
with an interpretation of the limitation in section
1252(f )(1) that strips the lower courts of subject matter
jurisdiction.[3] And previous statements from
this Court regarding section 1252(f )(1) are in accord. See
Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination
Comm.,525 U.S.
471, 481 (1999) (“By its plain terms, and even by its title,
[section 1252(f )(1)] is nothing more or less than a limit on
injunctive relief.”).

															In short, we see no basis for the conclusion that section
1252(f )(1) concerns subject matter jurisdiction. It is true
that section 1252(f )(1) uses the phrase “jurisdiction or
authority,” rather than simply the word “authority.” But
“[j]urisdiction . . . is a word of many, too many
meanings.” Steel Co., 523 U. S., at 90. And the
question whether a court has jurisdiction to grant a particular
remedy is different from the question whether it has subject matter
jurisdiction over a particular class of claims. See Reed
Elsevier, Inc. v. Muchnick,559 U.S.
154, 163–164 (2010) (concluding that “[t]he word ‘jurisdiction’
. . . says nothing about whether a federal court has
subject-matter jurisdiction to adjudicate claims”). Section
1252(f )(1) no doubt deprives the lower courts of
“jurisdiction” to grant classwide injunctive relief. See Aleman
Gonzalez, 596 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11). But that
limitation poses no obstacle to jurisdiction in this
Court.[4]

															III

															We now turn to the merits. Section 1225(b)(2)(C) provides: “In
the case of an alien . . . who is arriving on land
. . . from a foreign territory contiguous to the United
States, the [Secretary] may return the alien to that territory
pending a proceeding under section 1229a.” Section 1225(b)(2)(C)
plainly confers a discretionary authority to return aliens
to Mexico during the pendency of their immigration proceedings.
This Court has “repeatedly observed” that “the word ‘may’
clearly connotes discretion.” Opati v. Republic of
Sudan, 590 U. S. ___, ___ (2020) (slip op., at 10)
(emphasis in original); see also, e.g., Weyerhaeuser
Co. v. United States Fish and Wildlife Serv., 586
U. S. ___, ___ (2018) (slip op., at 14); Jama v.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement,543
U.S. 335, 346 (2005). The use of the word “may” in section
1225(b)(2)(C) thus makes clear that contiguous-territory return is
a tool that the Secretary “has the authority, but not the duty,” to
use. Lopez v. Davis,531 U.S.
230, 241 (2001).

															Respondents and the Court of Appeals concede this point. Brief
for Respondents 21 (contiguous-territory return is a “discretionary
authority”); 20 F. 4th, at 996, n. 18 (“It’s obviously true
that §1225(b)(2)(C) is discretionary.”). They base their
interpretation instead on section 1225(b)(2)(A), which provides
that, “in the case of an alien who is an applicant for admission,
if the examining immigration officer determines that an alien
seeking admission is not clearly and beyond a doubt entitled to be
admitted, the alien shall be detained for a proceeding under
section 1229a of this title.” Respondents and the Court of Appeals
thus urge an inference from the statutory structure: Because
section 1225(b)(2)(A) makes detention mandatory, they argue, the
otherwise-discretionary return authority in section 1225(b)(2)(C)
becomes mandatory when the Secretary violates that detention
mandate.

															The problem is that the statute does not say anything like that.
The statute says “may.” And “may” does not just suggest discretion,
it “clearly connotes” it. Opati, 590 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 10) (emphasis in original); see also Jama,
543 U. S., at 346 (“That connotation is particularly apt
where, as here, ‘may’ is used in contraposition to the word
‘shall.’ ”). Congress’s use of the word “may” is therefore
inconsistent with respondents’ proposed inference from the
statutory structure. If Congress had intended section 1225(b)(2)(C)
to operate as a mandatory cure of any noncompliance with the
Government’s detention obligations, it would not have conveyed that
intention through an unspoken inference in conflict with the
unambiguous, express term “may.” It would surely instead have
coupled that grant of discretion with some indication of its
sometimes-mandatory nature—perhaps by providing that the Secretary
“may return” certain aliens to Mexico, “unless the government fails
to comply with its detention obligations, in which case the
Secretary must return them.” The statutory grant of discretion here
contains no such caveat, and we will not rewrite it to include one.
See id., at 341 (“We do not lightly assume that Congress has
omitted from its adopted text requirements that it nonetheless
intends to apply.”).

															The principal dissent emphasizes that section 1225(b)(2)(A)
requires detention of all aliens that fall within its terms. See,
e.g., post, at 8 (Alito, J., dissenting) (“The
language of8 U. S. C. §1225(b)(2)(A) is unequivocal.”).
While the Government contests that proposition, we assume
arguendo for purposes of this opinion that the dissent’s
interpretation of section 1225(b)(2)(A) is correct, and that the
Government is currently violating its obligations under that
provision.[5] Even so, the dissent’s conclusions
regarding section 1225(b)(2)(C) do not follow. Under the actual
text of the statute, Justice Alito’s interpretation is practically
self-refuting. He emphasizes that “ ‘[s]hall be detained’
means ‘shall be detained,’ ” post, at 9, and criticizes
the Government’s “argument that ‘shall’ means ‘may,’ ”
post, at 10. But the theory works both ways. Congress
conferred contiguous-territory return authority in expressly
discretionary terms. “ ‘[M]ay return the alien’ means ‘may
return the alien.’ ” The desire to redress the Government’s
purported violation of section 1225(b)(2)(A) does not justify
transforming the nature of the authority conferred by section
1225(b)(2)(C).[6]

															The historical context in which the provision was adopted
confirms the plain import of its text. See, e.g.,
Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U. S. ___, ___ (2021)
(slip op., at 9) (textual analysis confirmed by “a wider look at
[the statute’s] structure and history”). Section 1225(b)(2)(C) was
not added to the statute until 1996, in the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA),
§302,110Stat.300–583—more than 90 years after the Immigration Act
of 1903 added the “shall be detained” language that appears in
section 1225(b)(2)(A). And section 1225(b)(2)(C) was enacted in the
immediate aftermath of a Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)
decision that specifically called into question the legality of the
contiguous-territory return practice. Prior to that decision, the
longstanding practice of the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS) had been to require some aliens arriving at land border ports
of entry to await their exclusion proceedings in Canada or Mexico.
The BIA noted the lack of “any evidence that this is a practice
known to Congress” and “the absence of a supporting regulation.”
In re Sanchez-Avila, 21 I. & N. Dec. 444, 465
(1996) (en banc). Congress responded mere months later by adding
section 1225(b)(2)(C) to IIRIRA and conferring on the Secretary
express authority (“may”) to engage in the very practice that the
BIA had questioned. And INS acknowledged that clarification shortly
thereafter, explaining that section 1225(b)(2)(C) and its
implementing regulation “simply add[ ] to the statute and
regulation a long-standing practice of the Service.” 62 Fed. Reg.
445 (1997). That modest backstory suggests a more humble role for
section 1225(b)(2)(C) than as a mandatory “safety valve” for any
alien who is not detained under section 1225(b)(2)(A).

															In addition to contradicting the statutory text and context, the
novelty of respondents’ interpretation bears mention. Since
IIRIRA’s enactment 26 years ago, every Presidential administration
has interpreted section 1225(b)(2)(C) as purely discretionary.
Indeed, at the time of IIRIRA’s enactment and in the decades since,
congressional funding has consistently fallen well short of the
amount needed to detain all land-arriving inadmissible aliens at
the border, yet no administration has ever used section
1225(b)(2)(C) to return all such aliens that it could not otherwise
detain.

															And the foreign affairs consequences of mandating the exercise
of contiguous-territory return likewise confirm that the Court of
Appeals erred. Article II of the Constitution authorizes the
Executive to “engag[e] in direct diplomacy with foreign heads of
state and their ministers.” Zivotofsky v. Kerry,576
U.S. 1, 14 (2015). Accordingly, the Court has taken care to avoid
“the danger of unwarranted judicial interference in the conduct of
foreign policy,” and declined to “run interference in [the]
delicate field of international relations” without “the affirmative
intention of the Congress clearly expressed.” Kiobel v.
Royal Dutch Petroleum Co.,569 U.S.
108, 115–116 (2013). That is no less true in the context of
immigration law, where “[t]he dynamic nature of relations with
other countries requires the Executive Branch to ensure that
enforcement policies are consistent with this Nation’s foreign
policy.” Arizona v. United States,567 U.S.
387, 397 (2012).

															By interpreting section 1225(b)(2)(C) as a mandate, the Court of
Appeals imposed a significant burden upon the Executive’s ability
to conduct diplomatic relations with Mexico. MPP applies
exclusively to non-Mexican nationals who have arrived at ports of
entry that are located “in the United States.” §1225(a)(1). The
Executive therefore cannot unilaterally return these migrants to
Mexico. In attempting to rescind MPP, the Secretary emphasized that
“[e]fforts to implement MPP have played a particularly outsized
role in diplomatic engagements with Mexico, diverting attention
from more productive efforts to fight transnational criminal and
smuggling networks and address the root causes of migration.” App.
to Pet. for Cert. 262a. Yet under the Court of Appeals’
interpretation, section 1225(b)(2)(C) authorized the District Court
to force the Executive to the bargaining table with Mexico, over a
policy that both countries wish to terminate, and to supervise its
continuing negotiations with Mexico to ensure that they are
conducted “in good faith.” 554 F. Supp. 3d, at 857 (emphasis
deleted). That stark consequence confirms our conclusion that
Congress did not intend section 1225(b)(2)(C) to tie the hands of
the Executive in this manner.

															Finally, we note that—as DHS explained in its October 29
Memoranda—the INA expressly authorizes DHS to process applicants
for admission under a third option: parole. See8 U. S. C.
§1182(d)(5)(A). Every administration, including the Trump and Biden
administrations, has utilized this authority to some extent.
Importantly, the authority is not unbounded: DHS may exercise its
discretion to parole applicants “only on a case-by-case basis for
urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit.”
Ibid. And under the APA, DHS’s exercise of discretion within
that statutory framework must be reasonable and reasonably
explained. See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States,
Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co.,463 U.S.
29 (1983). But the availability of the parole option
additionally makes clear that the Court of Appeals erred in holding
that the INA required the Government to continue implementing
MPP.

															In sum, the contiguous-territory return authority in section
1225(b)(2)(C) is discretionary—and remains discretionary
notwithstanding any violation of section 1225(b)(2)(A). To
reiterate: we need not and do not resolve the parties’ arguments
regarding whether section 1225(b)(2)(A) must be read in light of
traditional principles of law enforcement discretion, and whether
the Government is lawfully exercising its parole authorities
pursuant to sections 1182(d)(5) and 1226(a). We merely hold that
section 1225(b)(2)(C) means what it says: “may” means “may,” and
the INA itself does not require the Secretary to continue
exercising his discretionary authority under these
circumstances.

															IV

															The Court of Appeals also erred in holding that “[t]he October
29 Memoranda did not constitute a new and separately reviewable
‘final agency action.’ ” 20 F. 4th, at 951. To recap, the
Secretary first attempted to terminate MPP through the June 1
Memorandum. As the Court of Appeals correctly held, that
constituted final agency action. See id., at 947 (citing
Bennett v. Spear,520 U.S.
154 (1997)). But the District Court found that the Secretary’s
stated grounds in the June 1 Memorandum were inadequate, and
therefore “vacated” the June 1 Memorandum and “remanded [the
matter] to DHS for further consideration.” 554 F. Supp. 3d, at
857.

															As we explained two Terms ago in Department of Homeland
Security v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 591 U. S. ___
(2020), upon finding that the grounds for agency action are
inadequate, “a court may remand for the agency to do one of two
things.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 13). “First, the agency
can offer ‘a fuller explanation of the agency’s reasoning at the
time of the agency action.’ ” Ibid. (emphasis deleted).
If it chooses this route, “the agency may elaborate” on its initial
reasons for taking the action, “but may not provide new ones.”
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 14). Alternatively, “the agency
can ‘deal with the problem afresh’ by taking new agency
action.” Ibid. (quoting SEC v. Chenery
Corp.,332 U.S.
194, 201 (1947) (Chenery II)). “An agency taking this
route is not limited to its prior reasons.” Regents, 591
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14).

															Here, perhaps in light of this Court’s previous determination
that the Government had “failed to show a likelihood of success on
the claim that the [June 1 Memorandum] was not arbitrary and
capricious,” 594 U. S. ___, the Secretary selected the second
option from Regents: He accepted the District Court’s
vacatur and dealt with the problem afresh. The October 29 Memoranda
made that clear “by its own terms,” Regents, 591 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 14), in which the Secretary stated: “I am
hereby terminating MPP. Effective immediately, I hereby supersede
and rescind the June 1 memorandum.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
263a–264a. And consistent with that approach, the October 29
Memoranda offered several “new reasons absent from” the June 1
Memorandum, Regents, 591 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
14), including an examination of the “considerations that the
District Court determined were insufficiently addressed in the June
1 memo,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 259a.

															The October 29 Memoranda were therefore final agency action for
the same reasons that the June 1 Memorandum was final agency
action. That is, both the June 1 Memorandum and the October 29
Memoranda, when they were issued, “mark[ed] the ‘consummation’ of
the agency’s decisionmaking process” and resulted in “rights and
obligations [being] determined.” Bennett, 520 U. S., at
178. As the Court of Appeals explained, the June 1 Memorandum
“bound DHS staff by forbidding them to continue the program in any
way from that moment on.” 20 F. 4th, at 947. That rationale also
applies to the October 29 Memoranda, which were therefore final
agency action under the APA.[7]

															The various rationales offered by respondents and the Court of
Appeals in support of the contrary conclusion lack merit.[8] First, the Court of Appeals framed the question by
postulating the existence of an agency decision wholly apart from
any “agency statement of general or particular applicability
. . . designed to implement” that decision. 5

															U. S. C. §551(4); see 20 F. 4th, at 950–951 (“The
States are challenging the Termination Decision—not the June
1 Memorandum, the October 29 Memoranda, or any other memo.”). To
the extent that the Court of Appeals understood itself to be
reviewing an abstract decision apart from specific agency action,
as defined in the APA, that was error. It was not the case that the
June 1 Memorandum and the October 29 Memoranda “simply
explained DHS’s decision,” while only the decision itself
“had legal effect.” Id., at 951. To the contrary, the June 1
Memorandum and the October 29 Memoranda were themselves the
operative agency actions, each of them an “agency statement
. . . designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law
or policy.”5 U. S. C. §551(4).

															Second, and relatedly, respondents characterized the October 29
Memoranda as post hoc rationalizations of the June 1
Memorandum under our decision in Regents. Brief for
Respondents 40 (“[T]he [October 29] Memoranda are nothing more than
improper, post hoc rationalizations for terminating MPP.”);
see also 20 F. 4th, at 961 (questioning how the October 29
Memoranda “[could] be anything more than post hoc
rationalizations of the Termination Decision”). But Regents
involved the exact opposite situation from this one. There, as
here, DHS had attempted to rescind a prior administration’s
immigration policy, but a District Court found the rescission
inadequately explained. Faced with the same two options outlined
above, then- Secretary Nielsen elected the first option rather than
the second. That is, she chose to “rest on the [original]
Memorandum while elaborating on [her] prior reasoning,” rather than
“issue a new rescission bolstered by new reasons absent from the
[original] Memorandum.” 591 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14).
As such, her elaboration “was limited to the agency’s original
reasons,” and was “ ‘viewed critically’ to ensure that the
rescission [was] not upheld on the basis of impermissible
‘post hoc rationalization.’ ” Id., at
___–___ (slip op., at 14–15). And because the then-Secretary’s
reasoning had “little relationship to that of her predecessor,” the
Court characterized the new explanations as “impermissible
post hoc rationalizations . . . not properly
before us.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 15).

															The prohibition on post hoc rationalization applies
only when the agency proceeds by the first option from
Regents. Under that circumstance, because the agency has
chosen to “rest on [its original action] while elaborating on its
prior reasoning,” id., at ___ (slip op., at 14), the bar on
post hoc rationalization operates to ensure that the
agency’s supplemental explanation is anchored to “the grounds that
the agency invoked when it took the action,” Michigan v.
EPA,576 U.S. 743, 758 (2015). By contrast, as noted above,
the Secretary here chose the second option from Regents, and
“ ‘deal[t] with the problem afresh’ by taking new
agency action.” 591 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14). That
second option can be more procedurally onerous than the first—the
agency “must comply with the procedural requirements for new agency
action”—but the benefit is that the agency is “not limited to its
prior reasons” in justifying its decision. Ibid. Indeed, the
entire purpose of the October 29 Memoranda was for the Secretary to
“issue a new rescission bolstered by new reasons absent from the
[June 1] Memorandum,” ibid.—reasons that he hoped would
answer the District Court’s concerns from the first go-round.
Having returned to the drawing table and taken new action,
therefore, the Secretary was not subject to the charge of
post hoc rationalization.

															Third, respondents invoke our decision in Department of
Commerce v. New York, 588 U. S. ___ (2019), to
contend that DHS’s failure to “hew[ ] to the administrative
straight and narrow” deprives the October 29 Memoranda of the
presumption of regularity that normally attends agency action,
Brief for Respondents 43. As we explained in that case, “in
reviewing agency action, a court is ordinarily limited to
evaluating the agency’s contemporaneous explanation in light of the
existing administrative record.” Department of Commerce, 588
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 23). Department of Commerce
involved a “narrow exception to th[at] general rule” that applies
where the challengers to the agency’s action make a “strong showing
of bad faith or improper behavior” on the part of the agency.
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 24) (quoting Citizens to
Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe,401 U.S.
402, 420 (1971)). We held that exception satisfied by an
accumulation of “unusual circumstances” that demonstrated an
“explanation for agency action that [was] incongruent with what the
record reveal[ed] about the agency’s priorities and decisionmaking
process.” Department of Commerce, 588 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 28).

															The circumstances in this case do not come close to those in
Department of Commerce. Nothing in this record suggests a
“significant mismatch between the decision the Secretary made and
the rationale he provided.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 26).
Respondents direct us instead to the Government’s litigation
conduct. But the examples of misconduct to which respondents
refer—such as a failure to timely complete the administrative
record, Brief for Respondents 42—have no bearing on the legal
status of the October 29 Memoranda. And in any event, they fall
well short of the “strong showing of bad faith or improper
behavior,” Overton Park, 401 U. S., at 420, that we
require before deviating from our normal rule that “[t]he grounds
upon which an administrative order must be judged are those upon
which the record discloses that its action was based,” SEC
v. Chenery Corp.,318 U.S.
80, 87 (1943).

															The Court of Appeals leveled the related but more modest charge
that the Secretary failed to proceed with a sufficiently open mind.
See, e.g., 20 F. 4th, at 955 (agency proceeded “without a
hint of an intention to put the Termination Decision back on the
chopping block and rethink things”). But the agency’s ex
ante preference for terminating MPP—like any other feature of
an administration’s policy agenda—should not be held against the
October 29 Memoranda. “It is hardly improper for an agency head to
come into office with policy preferences and ideas . . .
and work with staff attorneys to substantiate the legal basis for a
preferred policy.” Department of Commerce, 588 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 26); see also State Farm, 463
U. S., at 59 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part) (“As long as [an] agency remains within the bounds
established by Congress, it is entitled to assess administrative
records and evaluate priorities in light of the philosophy of the
administration.” (footnote omitted)).

															And the critique is particularly weak on these facts. The Court
of Appeals took the agency to task for its September 29
announcement of its “inten[tion] to issue in the coming weeks a new
memorandum terminating” MPP. 20 F. 4th, at 954; see ibid.
(“Rather than announcing an intention to reconsider its
Termination Decision, the announcement set forth DHS’s
conclusion in unmistakable terms.”). But that announcement
came over six weeks after the District Court’s August 13 remand—a
substantial window of time for the agency to conduct a bona fide
reconsideration.

															More importantly, this Court has previously rejected criticisms
of agency closemindedness based on an identity between proposed and
final agency action. See Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter
and Paul Home v. Pennsylvania, 591 U. S. ___, ___
(2020) (slip op., at 24) (“declin[ing] to evaluate the [agency’s]
final rules under [an] open-mindedness test” where interim and
final rules were “virtually identical” but procedural requirements
were otherwise satisfied). Similar principles refute the Court of
Appeals’ criticism of the October 29 Memoranda for their failure to
“alter the Termination Decision in any way.” 20 F. 4th, at 946. It
is black-letter law that an agency that takes superseding action on
remand is entitled to “reexamine[ ] the problem, recast its
rationale and reach[ ] the same result.” Chenery II,
332 U. S., at 196; see also Regents, 591 U. S., at
___ (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting
in part) (slip op., at 4) (“Courts often consider an agency’s
. . . additional explanations made . . . on
remand from a court, even if the agency’s bottom-line decision
itself does not change.”).

															Finally, the Court of Appeals erred to the extent it viewed the
Government’s decision to appeal the District Court’s injunction as
relevant to the question of the October 29 Memoranda’s status as
final agency action. Nothing prevents an agency from undertaking
new agency action while simultaneously appealing an adverse
judgment against its original action. That is particularly so under
the circumstances of this case. The second condition of the
District Court’s injunction, which purported to bind DHS to
implement MPP in perpetuity subject only to congressional funding
choices outside its control, as a practical matter left the
Government no choice but to appeal. And the agency reasonably chose
to accede to the District Court’s APA analysis of the June 1
Memorandum and seek to ameliorate those concerns in the
meantime.

															*  *  *

															For the reasons explained, the Government’s rescission of MPP
did not violate section 1225 of the INA, and the October 29
Memoranda did constitute final agency action. We therefore reverse
the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand the case for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. On remand, the
District Court should consider in the first instance whether the
October 29 Memoranda comply with section 706 of the APA. See
State Farm, 463 U. S., at 46–57.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1  The provision refers to the Attorney
General, but the authority it confers has been transferred to the
Secretary of Homeland Security. See Department of Homeland
Security v. Thuraissigiam, 591 U. S. ___, ___,
n. 3 (2020) (slip op., at 4, n. 3).
2  Justice Barrett raises a host of
additional questions regarding the “Supreme Court” parenthetical,
post, at 4–5 (dissenting opinion), and she faults us for
relying on this aspect of the provision without comprehensively
“explain[ing] how it would work,” post, at 5. But we see no
need to explore every aspect or consequence of the parenthetical in
order to answer the narrow question of our jurisdiction over this
case. In declining to resolve these additional complexities, we
merely heed Justice Barrett’s admonition to “tread . . .
carefully.” Post, at 6.
3  Justice Barrett notes that
Preap involved consolidated cases, and that in one of the
two cases the District Court granted declaratory as well as
injunctive relief. Post, at 5, n. (dissenting opinion). That
misses the point. The Preap District Court granted only
injunctive relief, presenting the exact circumstances we confront
here, yet this Court exercised jurisdiction over that lawsuit and
resolved it on the merits.
4  At our request, the parties briefed
several additional questions regarding the operation of section
1252(f )(1), namely, whether its limitation on “jurisdiction
or authority” is subject to forfeiture and whether that limitation
extends to other specific remedies, such as declaratory relief and
relief under section 706 of the APA. We express no view on those
questions.
5  For this reason, Justice Alito
misunderstands our analysis in insisting that our opinion
authorizes the Government to release aliens subject to detention
under section 1225(b)(2)(A). See post, at 8 (dissenting
opinion). We need not and do not decide whether the detention
requirement in section 1225(b)(2)(A) is subject to principles of
law enforcement discretion, as the Government argues, or whether
the Government’s current practices simply violate that
provision.
6  In arguing that the Court should do
so, the dissent proposes a number of hypotheticals in which a party
fails to comply with a legal obligation imposed by statute and
additionally refuses to exercise a discretionary alternative
authorized by that statute. Post, at 12–13 (Alito, J.,
dissenting). We wholeheartedly endorse the conclusion that the
dissent draws from these hypotheticals: that “the failure to make
use of the discretionary option would not be seen as a valid excuse
for non-compliance with the command that certain conduct ‘shall’ be
performed.” Post, at 13. But the question before us is not
whether the Government is violating the immigration laws generally.
The question is whether the INA requires the government to continue
implementing MPP. And the statutory text clearly answers that
question in the negative.
7  Justice Alito contends that the
October 29 Memoranda were not final agency action because they did
not obligate DHS employees to immediately cease implementing MPP;
instead, they required them to do so “as soon as practicable after
a final judicial decision to vacate” the District Court’s
injunction. App. to Pet. for Cert. 264a. But as he acknowledges,
the standard for final agency action is whether the action
“result[ed] in a final determination of ‘rights or
obligations.’ ” Post, at 17 (quoting Bennett,
520 U. S., at 178; emphasis added). The fact that the agency
could not cease implementing MPP, as directed by the October 29
Memoranda, until it obtained vacatur of the District Court’s
injunction, did not make the October 29 Memoranda any less the
agency’s final determination of its employees’ obligation to do so
once such judicial authorization had been obtained.
8  One rationale that we do not address
at length is the Court of Ap-peals’ extended analogy to the
D. C. Circuit’s “reopening doctrine.” Respondents do not
defend the Court of Appeals’ reliance on that doctrine. In any
event, this Court has never adopted it, and the doctrine appears to
be inapposite to the question of final agency action. See
National Assn. of Reversionary Property Owners v. Surface
Transp. Bd., 
158 F.3d 135, 141 (CADC 1998) (describing the doctrine as an
“exception to statutory limits on the time for seeking review of an
agency decision” (alterations omitted)).


