::decision_cite:: 22-1025
::decision_name::  Gonzalez v. Trevino
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: 
::opinion_type:: 
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1025

															_________________

															SYLVIA GONZALEZ, PETITIONER v. EDWARD
TREVINO, II, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															

															Per Curiam.

															In Nieves v. Bartlett, 587 U.S.
391, 402 (2019), this Court held that, as a general rule, a
plaintiff bringing a retaliatory-arrest claim “must plead and prove
the absence of probable cause for the arrest.” At the same time, we
recognized a narrow exception to that rule. The existence of
probable cause does not defeat a plaintiff ’s claim if he
produces “objective evidence that he was arrested when otherwise
similarly situated individuals not engaged in the same sort of
protected speech had not been.” Id., at 407. We granted
certiorari in this case to consider whether the Fifth Circuit
properly applied these principles. It did not. We therefore vacate
that court’s judgment and remand for proceedings consistent with
this opinion.

															I

															In 2019, Sylvia Gonzalez ran for a seat on the
city council of Castle Hills, a small town in southern Texas. While
she was on the campaign trail, Gonzalez heard multiple complaints
about the city manager, Ryan Rapelye. As city manager, Rapelye was
responsible for, among other things, enforcing the city’s laws and
managing its budget.

															Gonzalez was elected in May 2019. Her first act
in office was to help gather signatures for a petition seeking
Rapelye’s removal. Eventually, over 300 residents signed the
petition. The petition was introduced at the next city council
meeting, where discussions grew heated after various residents rose
to Rapelye’s defense and spoke against Gonzalez. The discussion
over the petition continued the next day.

															At the end of the second day, Gonzalez was
packing up her belongings when the mayor, Edward Trevino, II, asked
her for the petition. Gonzalez indicated that the petition was in
Trevino’s possession, which he denied. He then asked Gonzalez to
check her binder, where she found the petition. Gonzalez claims
that she “did not intentionally put the petition in her binder,”
and that she was “surprise[d]” to find it there. Complaint and Jury
Demand in No. 5:20–cv–01151 (WD Tex., Sept. 9, 2020), ECF Doc. 1,
p. 11.

															Trevino brought this incident to the city
police’s attention, and an investigation into these events soon
began. Within a month, a private attorney tasked with leading the
investigation concluded that Gonzalez had likely violated a Texas
anti-tampering statute that, among other things, prohibits a person
from intentionally “remov[ing] . . . a governmental
record.” Tex. Penal Code Ann. §§37.10(a)(3), (c)(1) (West Cum.
Supp. 2023).[1]

															On the private attorney’s request, a local
Magistrate granted a warrant for Gonzalez’s arrest. When she heard
the news, Gonzalez turned herself in and spent an evening in jail.
The district attorney ultimately dismissed the charges. Gonzalez
claims that this episode has convinced her to step away from
political life.

															Gonzalez brought suit under 42
U. S. C. §1983, in Federal District Court against Trevino
along with the police chief and the private attorney in their
individual capacities.[2] Her
complaint alleged that she was arrested in retaliation for her role
in organizing the petition for Rapelye’s removal and that the
defendants therefore violated her First Amendment rights.

															To bolster her claim, Gonzalez alleged that she
had reviewed the past decade’s misdemeanor and felony data for
Bexar County (where Castle Hills is located) and that her review
had found that the Texas anti-tampering statute had never been used
in the county “to criminally charge someone for trying to steal a
nonbinding or expressive document.” ECF Doc. 1, at 17. Gonzalez’s
search turned up 215 felony indictments, and she characterized the
typical indictment as involving “accusations of either using or
making fake government identification documents.” Ibid.
Other felony indictments included ones for fake checks, hiding
murder evidence, or cheating on government exams. Every misdemeanor
case, according to Gonzalez, involved “fake social security
numbers, driver’s licenses, [or] green cards.” Ibid.
Gonzalez pointed to this research as evidence that the defendants
had engaged in a political vendetta by bringing a “sham charge”
against her. Id., at 27.

															The defendants moved to dismiss the complaint.
They argued that the presence of probable cause defeated Gonzalez’s
retaliatory-arrest claims against the individual defendants. The
District Court denied the defendants’ motion. Although Gonzalez
conceded that probable cause supported her arrest, the court
allowed her claim to advance after finding that it fell within an
exception to the no-probable-cause rule that we recognized in
Nieves. Gonzalez v. Castle Hills, 2021 WL
4046758, *5, n. 7 (WD Tex., Mar. 12, 2021).

															The Fifth Circuit reversed that decision on
appeal. The court thought that a plaintiff ’s claim could fall
within the Nieves exception only if the plaintiff proffered
“comparative evidence” of “otherwise similarly situated individuals
who engaged in the same criminal conduct but were not arrested.” 42
F. 4th 487, 493 (2022) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Gonzalez’s claim failed because she did not provide such
evidence.

															We granted certiorari. 601 U. S. ___
(2023).

															II

															Gonzalez seeks reversal on two grounds. First,
she asks us to reject the Fifth Circuit’s rule that plaintiffs must
use specific comparator evidence to demonstrate that they fall
within the Nieves exception. Second, Gonzalez contends that
the Nieves no-probable-cause rule applies only to claims
predicated on split-second arrests, rather than deliberative
ones.

															We agree with Gonzalez that the Fifth Circuit
took an overly cramped view of Nieves. That court thought
Gonzalez had to provide very specific comparator evidence—that is,
examples of identifiable people who “mishandled a government
petition” in the same way Gonzalez did but were not arrested. 42
F. 4th, at 492. Although the Nieves exception is slim,
the demand for virtually identical and identifiable comparators
goes too far.

															We recognized the Nieves exception to
account for “circumstances where officers have probable cause to
make arrests, but typically exercise their discretion not to do
so.” 587 U. S., at 406. To fall within the exception, a
plaintiff must produce evidence to prove that his arrest occurred
in such circumstances. The only express limit we placed on the sort
of evidence a plaintiff may present for that purpose is that it
must be objective in order to avoid “the significant problems that
would arise from reviewing police conduct under a purely subjective
standard.” Id., at 407.

															Here, Gonzalez provided that sort of evidence.
She was charged with intentionally “remov[ing] . . . a
governmental record.” Tex. Penal Code Ann. §37.10(a)(3). Gonzalez’s
survey is a permissible type of evidence because the fact that no
one has ever been arrested for engaging in a certain kind of
conduct—especially when the criminal prohibition is longstanding
and the conduct at issue is not novel—makes it more likely that an
officer has declined to arrest someone for engaging in such
conduct in the past.

															Because we agree with Gonzalez’s first argument,
we do not need to reach her second. We vacate the judgment below
and remand the case for the lower courts to assess whether
Gonzalez’s evidence suffices to satisfy the Nieves
exception.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The statute also
prohibits a person from intentionally “destroy[ing],”
“conceal[ing],” or “otherwise impair[ing] the verity, legibility,
or availability” of a governmental record.
2
 She also pressed a claim
in this action against Castle Hills. That claim is not before
us.


