::decision_cite:: 22-1008
::decision_name::  Corner Post, Inc. v. Board of Governors
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kavanaugh
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1008

															_________________

															CORNER POST, INC., PETITIONER v. BOARD
OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eighth circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Kavanaugh, concurring.

															I agree with the Court that a claim under the
Administrative Procedure Act accrues when the plaintiff is injured
by the challenged agency rule. I also agree with the Court that
today’s decision vindicates the APA’s “ ‘basic presumption’ that
anyone injured by agency action should have access to judicial
review.” Ante, at 21 (quoting Abbott Laboratories v.
Gardner, 387
U.S. 136, 140 (1967)).

															I write separately to explain a crucial
additional point: Corner Post can obtain relief in this case only
because the APA authorizes vacatur of agency rules.

															Corner Post challenged an agency rule that
regulates the fees that banks may charge. But Corner Post is not a
bank regulated by the rule. Rather, it is a business that must pay
the fees charged by the banks who are regulated by the rule. Corner
Post complains that the agency rule allows banks to charge fees
that are unreasonably high.

															Corner Post’s suit is a typical APA suit. An
unregulated plaintiff such as Corner Post often will sue under the
APA to challenge an allegedly unlawful agency rule that regulates
others but also has adverse downstream effects on the plaintiff. In
those cases, an injunction barring the agency from enforcing the
rule against the plaintiff would not help the plaintiff, because
the plaintiff is not regulated by the rule in the first place.
Instead, the unregulated plaintiff can obtain meaningful relief
only if the APA authorizes vacatur of the agency rule, thereby
remedying the adverse downstream effects of the rule on the
unregulated plaintiff.

															The APA empowers federal courts to “hold
unlawful and set aside agency action” that, as relevant here, is
arbitrary and capricious or is contrary to law. 5 U. S. C. §706(2).
The Federal Government and the federal courts have long understood
§706(2) to authorize vacatur of unlawful agency rules, including in
suits by unregulated plaintiffs who are adversely affected by an
agency’s regulation of others.

															Recently, the Government has advanced a
far-reaching argument that the APA does not allow vacatur. See
Brief for Respondent 42; Brief for United States in United
States v. Texas, O. T. 2022, No. 22–58, pp. 40–44.
Invoking a few law review articles, the Government contends that
the APA’s authorization to “set aside” agency action does not allow
vacatur, but instead permits a court only to enjoin an agency from
enforcing a rule against the plaintiff.

															If the Government were correct on that point,
Corner Post could not obtain any relief in this suit because, to
reiterate, Corner Post is not regulated by the rule to begin with.
And the APA would supply no remedy for most other
unregulated but adversely affected parties who traditionally
have brought, and regularly still bring, APA suits challenging
agency rules.

															The Government’s position would revolutionize
long-settled administrative law—shutting the door on entire classes
of everyday administrative law cases. The Government’s newly minted
position is both novel and wrong. It “disregards a lot of history
and a lot of law.” M. Sohoni, The Past and Future of Universal
Vacatur, 133 Yale L. J. 2305, 2311 (2024).

															The APA authorizes vacatur of agency rules;
therefore, Corner Post can obtain relief in this case.

															I

															Corner Post owns a truck stop and convenience
store in rural North Dakota. When a customer uses a debit card at
its business, Corner Post must pay a fee (known as an interchange
fee) to the bank that processes the customer’s transaction.

															As the Court explains, the Dodd-Frank Act
requires the Federal Reserve Board to “prescribe regulations” for
assessing whether interchange fees are “reasonable and proportional
to the cost incurred” in processing a debit-card transaction. 15 U.
S. C. §1693o–2(a)(3)(A); see ante, at 2. Pursuant to
the Act, the Board has issued a rule that sets a maximum fee of
about 21 cents per transaction. 76 Fed. Reg. 43394, 43420 (2011).
For convenience, I will refer to that rule as the fee rule.

															Corner Post is not subject to the fee rule.
Corner Post does not charge interchange fees to its customers, and
Corner Post lacks any authority to set those fees. But because
Corner Post must pay the fees to banks, it is affected by
the agency’s rule setting the maximum fees that banks may charge.
In particular, Corner Post would be harmed by a fee rule that
allows unreasonably high fees and would benefit from a fee rule
that more strictly limits the fees that banks may charge.

															The APA authorizes any person who has been
“adversely affected or aggrieved” by a “final agency action” to
obtain judicial review in federal district court. 5 U. S. C. §§702,
704. In an APA suit, the district court “shall” “hold unlawful and
set aside agency action” that is “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse
of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.”
§706(2)(A).

															Corner Post filed this APA suit because it
believes that the fee rule allows banks to charge unreasonably high
fees. In particular, Corner Post argues that the Board’s 21-cent
fee cap is unreasonably high and therefore arbitrary and capricious
under the APA. Corner Post asked the Federal District Court to
vacate the fee rule on the ground that the Board must more strictly
regulate bank fees (in other words, that the Board must set a lower
cap on the fees that banks may charge).

															Corner Post would not be able to obtain relief
in its lawsuit through any remedy other than vacatur. Corner Post
could not obtain relief through an injunction forbidding the Board
from enforcing the rule against it. That is because the rule does
not regulate Corner Post and therefore is not and cannot be
enforced against Corner Post in the first place. Nor could Corner
Post secure relief through an injunction against banks; the APA
does not authorize suits against private parties.

															Corner Post instead needs a remedy that acts
directly on the fee rule—specifically, by vacating it. Indeed,
without vacatur, it is hard to imagine what kind of lawsuit Corner
Post could file. At oral argument, the Government ultimately seemed
to acknowledge that reality and the necessity of the vacatur remedy
if Corner Post is to obtain any relief in this case. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 76 (“it’s possible that the only way to provide this
party relief would be vacatur”).[1]

															II

															For Corner Post to obtain relief, an important
question therefore is whether the APA authorizes vacatur of
unlawful agency actions, including agency rules.

															The answer is yes—in light of the text and
history of the APA, the longstanding and settled precedent adhering
to that text and history, and the radical consequences for
administrative law and individual liberty that would ensue if
vacatur were suddenly no longer available.

															The text and history of the APA authorize
vacatur. The text directs courts to “set aside” unlawful agency
actions. 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A). When Congress enacted the APA in
1946, the phrase “set aside” meant “cancel, annul, or revoke.”
Black’s Law Dictionary 1612 (3d ed. 1933); see also Black’s Law
Dictionary 1537 (4th ed. 1951) (same); Bouvier’s Law Dictionary
1103 (W. Baldwin ed. 1926) (“To annul; to make void; as, to set
aside an award”). At that time, it was common for an appellate
court that reversed the decision of a lower court to direct that
the lower court’s “judgment” be “set aside,” meaning vacated.
E.g., Shawkee Mfg. Co. v. Hartford-Empire
Co., 322 U.S.
271, 274 (1944). Likewise, Congress used the phrase “set aside”
in many pre-APA statutes that plainly contemplated the vacatur of
agency actions.[2]

															The APA incorporated that common and
contemporaneous meaning of “set aside.” When a federal court sets
aside an agency action, the federal court vacates that order—in
much the same way that an appellate court vacates the judgment of a
trial court.

															The APA prescribes the same “set aside” remedy
for all categories of “agency action,” including agency
adjudicative orders and agency rules. §§551(13), 706(2). When a
federal court concludes that an agency adjudicative order is
unlawful, the court must vacate that order. Around the time when
Congress enacted the APA, the phrase “set aside” the agency order
meant vacate that order. See, e.g., United
States v. L. A. Tucker Truck Lines, Inc., 344 U.S.
33, 38 (1952). And because federal courts must “set aside”
agency rules in the same way that they set aside agency orders,
successful challenges to agency rules must award the same remedy.
See M. Sohoni, The Power To Vacate a Rule, 88 Geo. Wash. L. Rev.
1121, 1131–1134 (2020). In short, to “set aside” a rule is to
vacate it.

															Longstanding precedent reinforces the text. Over
the decades, this Court has affirmed countless decisions that
vacated agency actions, including agency rules. See,
e.g., Department of Homeland Security v.
Regents of Univ. of Cal., 591 U.S. 1, 36, and n. 7 (2020);
Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U.S.
457, 486 (2001); Board of Governors, FRS v. Dimension
Financial Corp., 474 U.S.
361, 364–365 (1986). Those decisions vacated the challenged
agency rules rather than merely providing injunctive relief that
enjoined enforcement of the rules against the specific plaintiffs.
See, e.g., Regents of Univ. of Cal., 591 U.
S., at 9 (holding that the rescission of a major federal program
“must be vacated”). And the D. C. Circuit—which handles the lion’s
share of the country’s administrative law cases—has likewise long
recognized vacatur as the usual relief when a court holds that
agency rules are unlawful. See, e.g., National
Mining Assn. v. United States Army Corps of Engineers,

145 F.3d 1399, 1409 (CADC 1998). In the words of the D. C.
Circuit: “When a reviewing court determines that agency regulations
are unlawful, the ordinary result is that the rules are vacated—not
that their application to the individual petitioners is
proscribed.” Harmon v. Thornburgh, 878 F.2d 484, 495,
n. 21 (CADC 1989).

															Importantly, as Corner Post’s lawsuit shows, the
availability of vacatur determines not only the extent of the
relief that courts may award in APA suits by regulated
parties, but also whether unregulated parties can obtain
relief under the APA at all. In most APA litigation brought by
unregulated but adversely affected parties, a plaintiff can obtain
relief only through vacatur of the adverse agency action.
Prohibiting courts from vacating agency actions would essentially
close the courthouse doors on those unregulated plaintiffs—a
radical change to administrative law that would insulate a broad
swath of agency actions from any judicial review.[3]

															Vacatur is therefore essential to fulfill the
“basic presumption of judicial review” for parties who have been
“adversely affected or aggrieved” by federal agency action.
Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387
U.S. 136, 140 (1967) (quotation marks omitted). The Court has
long applied that “strong presumption” unless there is a
“persuasive reason to believe” that Congress intended to bar review
of certain actions. Bowen v. Michigan Academy of Family
Physicians, 476 U.S.
667, 670 (1986) (quotation marks omitted); see also,
e.g., Weyerhaeuser Co. v. United States
Fish and Wildlife Serv., 586 U.S. 9, 22–23 (2018);
Sackett v. EPA, 566 U.S.
120, 128–131 (2012). Eliminating the vacatur remedy would
contravene the strong Abbott Laboratories presumption by
insulating many agency rules from meaningful judicial review (which
perhaps is the Government’s motivation for its recent
campaign).

															The absence of vacatur would also create an
asymmetry. For example, without the vacatur remedy, a bank
could still challenge the Board’s regulation of interchange fees in
a suit for injunctive relief. The bank might argue that the fee cap
is too low and that the Board should be enjoined from enforcing the
cap against the bank—a result that would allow the bank to charge
higher fees. But because Corner Post is not subject to the Board’s
regulation, it could not contend that the fee cap is too high and
that the Board should be enjoined from keeping the cap so high. So
Corner Post would be precluded from suing even though the allegedly
unlawful regulation is causing it monetary injury.[4]

															III

															Eliminating vacatur as a remedy would
terminate entire classes of administrative litigation that have
traditionally been brought by unregulated parties.[5]

															One example is the wide range of administrative
law suits in which businesses target the allegedly unlawful
under-regulation of other businesses, such as their competitors.
For example, in National Credit Union Administration v.
First National Bank & Trust Co., several banks
challenged the decision of a federal agency to approve a series of
amendments to the charter of a federal credit union, a competitor
of the banks. 522 U.S.
479, 484–485 (1998). The amendments were controversial because
they expanded the markets in which the credit union could operate,
thereby increasing competition against the banks. The Court held
that the banks could sue under the APA to challenge the agency’s
approval of those charter amendments, and also that the agency’s
approval of the amendments was unlawful. Of course, the District
Court could remedy the banks’ harm only by vacating the approval of
the amendments. In short, for the plaintiff in First National
Bank to have a remedy, the APA must have authorized
vacatur.

															Those competitor suits are ubiquitous in
administrative law. Some plaintiffs have challenged the favorable
classification of a competitor’s drugs or medical products, see,
e.g., American Bioscience, Inc. v. Thompson,

269 F.3d 1077 (CADC 2001); a research guideline that increased
competition for federal grants, see, e.g., Sherley v.
Sebelius, 610 F.3d 69 (CADC 2010); and a competitor’s
exemption from a generally applicable rule, see, e.g.,
Regular Common Carrier Conference v. United States,
793 F.2d 376 (CADC 1986) (arose under the review provision in 28 U.
S. C. §2342). The Court has consistently held that the plaintiffs
incurring those injuries are “adversely affected or aggrieved by
agency action” within the meaning of the APA. 5 U. S. C. §702; see
First Nat. Bank, 522 U. S., at 488, 499; Investment
Company Institute v. Camp, 401 U.S.
617, 618–621 (1971); Association of Data Processing Service
Organizations, Inc. v. Camp, 397
U.S. 150, 157 (1970). But such competitor suits would be
largely if not entirely eradicated if the APA and similar statutory
review provisions did not authorize vacatur.

															Suits where one business challenges the
under-regulation of another go well beyond competitor suits. One
example is the Court’s landmark decision in Motor Vehicle
Manufacturers Association of United States, Inc. v. State
Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 463 U.S.
29 (1983). That case arose when several insurance companies
challenged a federal agency’s rescission of safety standards for
new motor vehicles. The Court held that the agency’s decision to
rescind those safety standards was subject to the same degree of
judicial review as the decision to issue the standards in the first
place. See id., at 40–44. The Court also concluded that the
rescission of the safety standards was arbitrary and capricious.
See id., at 44–57.

															At no point in that landmark opinion on the
judicial review of agency actions did the Court state (or need to
state) the obvious: Because the agency did not regulate the
insurers themselves, the insurers could obtain relief from the
downstream effects of the agency’s rescission of the safety
standards only if the insurers could obtain vacatur of that
rescission. The Court did not dwell on that remedial point because
the availability of vacatur was presumably obvious to all involved.
Only now—some 40 years later—does the Government imply that the
premise of State Farm was mistaken.

															The Government’s new position would also largely
eliminate the common form of environmental litigation where private
citizens sue a federal agency based on the externalities that an
agency action is likely to produce. Litigation often arises when a
federal agency approves a development project with potential
effects on the environment or on other property owners. Examples
include the construction of a new pipeline, see Delaware
Riverkeeper Network v. FERC, 753 F.3d 1304 (CADC 2014),
or the mining of federal land, see WildEarth Guardians v.
Jewell, 738 F.3d 298 (CADC 2013). In those cases, the
plaintiff generally cannot bring an APA suit against the developer,
who is usually a private party. See §704 (authorizing review of
“agency action”). Instead, the plaintiff typically sues the federal
agency that approved the development and asks a federal court to
vacate that approval.

															Some of those suits proceed under the APA;
others proceed under federal statutory review provisions that
similarly authorize courts to “set aside” agency action. See,
e.g., 15 U. S. C. §717r(b) (Natural Gas Act); 16 U.
S. C. §825l(b) (Federal Power Act). Regardless, all of those
suits depend on the availability of vacatur.

															Many APA suits similarly challenge federal
emissions limits or efficiency standards for cars, trucks, and
other sources of pollution. See, e.g., American
Public Gas Assn. v. Department of Energy, 72 F. 4th 1324
(CADC 2023). When a plaintiff alleges that an emissions limit does
too little to stop third parties from polluting the environment,
the plaintiff cannot bring an APA suit against the third party.
Rather, the plaintiff must sue the agency that enacted the
emissions limit. If the vacatur remedy were unavailable, the agency
that enacted the emissions limit would never face litigation from
unregulated parties seeking stricter limits; the agency could face
litigation only from regulated parties seeking looser limits.

															Workers and their unions also regularly
challenge agency rules that rescind or loosen federal workplace
safety standards. See, e.g., Transportation Div.
of Int’l Assn. of Sheet Metal, Air, Rail, and Transp. Workers
v. Federal Railroad Admin., 988 F.3d 1170 (CA9 2021)
(railroad industry); United Steel v. Mine Safety and
Health Admin., 925 F.3d 1279 (CADC 2019) (mining industry).
Those suits often arise under statutory review provisions that,
like the APA, authorize courts to “set aside” agency actions. See,
e.g., 28 U. S. C. §2342(7) (railroad industry); 30 U.
S. C. §816(a)(1) (mining industry). And the suits all depend on the
availability of vacatur as a remedy. In particular, the workers may
prevail in those suits only through vacatur of the agency rules. So
if “set aside” did not mean vacate, workplace safety rules could be
challenged from only one direction—by employers who want less
regulation, not by workers who want more regulation.

															The examples of standard agency litigation that
depend on the availability of vacatur are seemingly endless.
Vacatur was essential when American workers challenged a Department
of Labor rule that unlawfully allowed employers to access
inexpensive foreign labor, with the effect of lowering American
workers’ wages. See Mendoza v. Perez, 754 F.3d 1002
(CADC 2014). Vacatur was essential when a county challenged the
Department of the Interior’s allowance for Indian gaming on nearby
land. See Butte Cty. v. Hogen, 613 F.3d 190 (CADC
2010). Vacatur is often essential when a State challenges an agency
action that does not regulate the State directly but has adverse
downstream effects on the State. See, e.g.,
Department of Commerce v. New York, 588 U.S. 752
(2019).[6]

															I will stop there. But to be clear, I could go
on all day (and then some) listing cases where vacatur was
necessary for an unregulated but adversely affected plaintiff in an
APA suit to obtain relief.

															IV

															Against all of that text, history, precedent,
and common sense, the Government has recently rejected the
straightforward and long-accepted conclusion that the phrase “set
aside” in the APA authorizes vacatur. Instead, the Government
contends that plaintiffs harmed by agency rules must seek
injunctions against enforcement of those rules. See Brief for
United States in United States v. Texas, O. T. 2022,
No. 22–58, pp. 40–44. One effect of the Government’s new position
would be to insulate many agency rules from meaningful judicial
review in suits by unregulated but adversely affected parties.

															To support its new position, the Government has
offered an array of arguments.

															First, the Government says that vacatur
of a federal rule is akin to a nationwide injunction—in other
words, an injunction that prohibits the Government from enforcing a
law against anyone, not just the parties in a specific case.
The Government has contended that equitable relief is ordinarily
limited to the parties in a specific case. Therefore, nationwide
injunctions would be permissible only if Congress authorized
them.

															But in the APA, Congress did in fact depart from
that baseline and authorize vacatur. As noted above, the text of
the APA expressly authorizes federal courts to “set aside” agency
action. 5 U. S. C. §706(2). “Unlike judicial review of statutes, in
which courts enter judgments and decrees only against litigants,
the APA” and related statutory review provisions “go further by
empowering the judiciary to act directly against the challenged
agency action.” J. Mitchell, The Writ-of-Erasure Fallacy, 104 Va.
L. Rev. 933, 1012 (2018). The text of §706(2) directs federal
courts to vacate agency actions in the same way that appellate
courts vacate the judgments of trial courts. See M. Sohoni, The
Power To Vacate a Rule, 88 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1121, 1131–1134
(2020). The text of the APA therefore authorizes vacatur of agency
rules. By contrast, Congress has rarely authorized courts to act
directly on federal statutes or to prohibit their enforcement
against nonparties. As a result, background equitable principles
may control in those non-APA cases.

															Second, the Government argues that the
remedies available in APA suits are not governed by §706(2), which
directs courts to “set aside” agency action, but instead are
governed by §703. That argument is weak. Section 703 determines the
“form of proceeding” for suits under the APA and identifies the
federal actors against whom an “action for judicial review may be
brought.”[7] But “no court has
ever held that Section 703 implicitly delimits the kinds of
remedies available in an APA suit.” M. Sohoni, The Past and Future
of Universal Vacatur, 133 Yale L. J. 2305, 2337 (2024). For good
reason: As explained above, the ordinary meaning of “set aside” in
§706(2) has long been understood to refer to the remedy of vacatur.
The conclusion that §706 governs remedies is also supported by
§706(1), which authorizes courts to “compel agency action
unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed”—unmistakably a remedy.
By contrast, the text of §703 “speaks to venue and forms of
proceedings, not to remedies, and regardless, its listing of the
available forms of proceedings is nonexhaustive.” Sohoni, The Past
and Future of Universal Vacatur, 133 Yale L. J., at 2337.

															To support its novel reliance on §703, the
Government suggests that the phrase “set aside” in §706(2) may
refer to a “rule of decision directing the reviewing court to
disregard unlawful” agency actions in “resolving the case before
it,” rather than the remedy of vacatur. Brief for United States in
United States v. Texas, O. T. 2022, No. 22–58, at 40.
But the leading cases and legal dictionaries at the time of the
APA’s enactment did not use “set aside” in that manner. They
instead referred to setting aside (that is, vacating) judgments—a
meaning entirely consistent with the APA’s authorization to vacate
agency actions. See supra, at 5. The Government’s position
instead relies on some colloquial uses of the phrase “set aside” in
federal constitutional challenges to state statutes. See,
e.g., Brief for United States in United States
v. Texas, O. T. 2022, No. 22–58, at 41 (citing
Mallinckrodt Chemical Works v. Missouri ex rel.
Jones, 238 U.S.
41, 54 (1915)); see also Mallinckrodt, 238 U. S., at 54
(referring to “one who seeks to set aside a state statute as
repugnant to the Federal Constitution”). That is a thin basis for
suddenly prohibiting entire categories of long-common
administrative litigation.

															Third, the Government seizes on
legislative history to argue that Congress did not expect the APA
to create new remedies against unlawful agency actions. But vacatur
was not a new remedy. On the contrary, several pre-APA statutes
authorized courts to “set aside” specific kinds of agency actions,
such as orders by the Interstate Commerce Commission. See n. 2,
supra. This Court correctly understood those statutes to
authorize vacatur. For example, in litigation regarding the
regulation of railroads, this Court held that an unlawful ICC order
was “void.” United States v. Baltimore & Ohio R.
Co., 293 U.S.
454, 464 (1935). Similar examples abound. See,
e.g., Sohoni, The Past and Future of Universal
Vacatur, 133 Yale L. J., at 2329–2335 (collecting cases). By
similarly authorizing courts to “set aside” agency actions, the APA
likewise authorized vacatur. §706(2).

															Moreover, although vacatur was not as common in
the years surrounding the APA’s enactment, there is a simple
explanation for that: Courts had few occasions to set aside agency
rules before this Court’s 1967 decision in Abbott
Laboratories v. Gardner, which significantly expanded
the opportunities for facial, pre-enforcement review of agency
rules. 387 U.S.
136, 139–141. Indeed, it was not until Abbott
Laboratories that “preenforcement review of agency rules”
became “the norm, not the exception.” S. Breyer & R. Stewart,
Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 1137 (2d ed. 1985).

															The Government’s current position on vacatur
would de facto overrule Abbott Laboratories as to
suits by unregulated parties. Not surprisingly, the Government’s
current position on vacatur sounds very similar to Justice Fortas’
dissent in a companion case to Abbott Laboratories, where he
lamented that in the wake of those decisions, a court would be able
to “suspend the operation of regulations in their entirety.”
Gardner v. Toilet Goods Assn., Inc., 387 U.S.
167, 175 (1967). In any event, to the extent that the
Government worries that vacatur of rules (as opposed to orders) is
more common today than it was in the 1950s, the Government’s true
grievance is with Abbott Laboratories.

															Fourth, the Government objects to the
real-world consequences that occur when a federal district court
wrongly vacates a lawful rule. I appreciate that concern. But
federal law already gives the Government tools to mitigate those
consequences—if not avoid them altogether. When the Government
believes that a district court has erroneously vacated a rule (or
erroneously issued a preliminary injunction against a rule), the
Government may promptly seek a stay in the relevant federal court
of appeals. To determine whether to grant a stay, the court of
appeals may then promptly review the Government’s likelihood of
success on the merits, among other factors. If the court of appeals
denies a stay, the Government may seek further review in this
Court. See Labrador v. Poe, 601 U. S. ___, ___ (2024)
(Kavanaugh, J., concurring in grant of stay) (slip op., at 2). The
Government’s frustration with the occasional incorrect district
court vacatur of an agency rule is understandable. But especially
given the readily accessible and regularly utilized procedures for
staying a district court’s vacatur,[8] we should not overreact by entirely gutting vacatur as
a remedy and thereby barring unregulated but adversely affected
parties from bringing APA suits.

															Not surprisingly, when asked at oral argument in
this case about the extraordinary consequences of its new
no-vacatur position, the Government seemed to backpedal and hedge a
bit. The Government suggested that vacatur may actually still be
appropriate if it is “the only way to give the party before the
court relief.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 76. The Government also said that
“it’s possible that the only way to provide” Corner Post “relief
would be vacatur.” Ibid.

															I appreciate the Government’s apparent attempt
to back away from its extreme stance. But in doing so, the
Government also revealed the weakness of its position. The meaning
of “set aside” in the APA cannot reasonably depend on the specific
party before the court. Either the APA authorizes vacatur, or it
does not.

															More to the point, the Government’s answer at
oral argument is a solution in search of a problem. The federal
courts have long interpreted the APA to authorize vacatur of agency
actions. Both the text and the history of the APA support that
interpretation, and courts have had no real difficulty applying the
remedy in practice. Some 78 years after the APA and 57 years after
Abbott Laboratories, I would not suddenly throw out that
sound and settled interpretation of the APA and eliminate entire
classes of historically common and vitally important litigation
against federal agencies.

															*  *  *

															The Government’s crusade against vacatur would
create “strange and even absurd consequences.” Sohoni, The Past and
Future of Universal Vacatur, 133 Yale L. J., at 2340. In this
opinion, I have described one such consequence: It would leave
unregulated plaintiffs like Corner Post without a remedy in APA
challenges to agency rules. The Government’s position therefore
would fundamentally reshape administrative law, leaving
administrative agencies with extraordinary new power to issue rules
free from potential suits by unregulated but adversely affected
parties—businesses, environmental plaintiffs, workers, the list
goes on.

															I agree with the longstanding consensus—a
consensus based on text, history, precedent, and common sense—that
vacatur is an appropriate remedy when a federal court holds that an
agency rule is unlawful. Because vacatur remains an available
remedy under the APA, Corner Post can obtain meaningful relief if
it prevails in this lawsuit.

Notes
1
A plaintiff could not challenge
the fee rule by suing to “compel agency action” that is “unlawfully
withheld or unreasonably delayed.” 5 U. S. C. §706(1). The remedy
of compelling agency action applies if an agency fails to issue a
required rule. But here, the Board issued a rule, and the question
is whether the rule set a reasonable fee cap. It would therefore
make little sense to say that the fee rule has been “withheld” or
“delayed.” Indeed, it seems that §706(1) has almost never been used
to challenge extant agency rules, as opposed to challenging the
absence of required rules.
2
See, e.g., Hepburn Act
of 1906, ch. 3591, §5, 34 Stat. 584, 592 (courts could “enjoin, set
aside, annul, or suspend any order or requirement of ” the
Interstate Commerce Commission); Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
ch. 404, §25(a), 48 Stat. 881, 902 (authorizing courts “to affirm,
modify, and enforce or set aside [an] order” of the SEC); Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938, ch. 675, §701(f )(3), 52
Stat. 1040, 1055–1056 (authorizing a court to “affirm the order” of
the FDA, “or to set it aside in whole or in part, temporarily or
permanently”).
3
Most of the recent academic and
judicial discussion of this issue has addressed suits by regulated
parties. That discussion has largely missed a major piece of the
issue—suits by unregulated but adversely affected
parties.
4
Absent vacatur, the remedy for
a regulated plaintiff would not automatically extend to
other regulated parties. For example, if a district court issued an
injunction that prevents the Board from enforcing the fee rule
against one bank, the Board would still be able to enforce the fee
rule against other banks. For those other banks to obtain the same
relief, they would need to either (i) file similar APA suits and
request similar injunctions or (ii) wait and see if the fee rule is
temporarily enjoined or held unlawful by either the relevant court
of appeals or this Court. In that respect, eliminating the vacatur
remedy would delay relief for many regulated parties. That said, in
light of vertical stare decisis, the consequences for
regulated parties of eliminating vacatur would not be as severe as
the consequences for unregulated parties. See Labrador v.
Poe, 601 U. S. ___, ___ (2024) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in
grant of stay) (slip op., at 8–9); cf. W. Baude & S. Bray,
Proper Parties, Proper Relief, 137 Harv. L. Rev. 153, 183 (2023)
(when the Supreme Court “holds a statute to be unconstitutional or
a rule to be unlawful, it may be as good as
vacated”).
5
This opinion focuses primarily
on administrative litigation that arises under the APA. But
Congress has also enacted special statutory review provisions that
similarly authorize federal courts to “set aside” specific agency
actions. See, e.g., 15 U. S. C. §78y(a) (orders of
the SEC); 16 U. S. C. §825l(b) (FERC); 28 U. S. C. §2342
(the FCC, the Atomic Energy Commission, and other agencies). By
arguing that the APA’s use of “set aside” does not authorize
vacatur, the Government implies that vacatur is also unavailable
under those similar review provisions.
6
In some circumstances, usually
when a court rules that an agency must provide additional
explanation for the challenged agency action or must regulate some
entity or activity more extensively, some courts have
remanded to the agency without vacatur. Remand without vacatur is
essentially a shorthand way of vacating a rule and staying the
vacatur pending the agency’s completion of an additional required
action, such as providing additional explanation or issuing a new,
more stringent rule. I do not address that practice here, which has
been the subject of some debate. See Checkosky v.
SEC, 
23 F.3d 452, 462–465 (CADC 1994) (Silberman, J.) (explaining
the practice); see also id., at 493, n. 37 (Randolph, J.)
(noting that courts and parties alternatively may avoid any
“difficulties” associated with vacatur by “a stay of the mandate”).
Importantly for present purposes, the view that vacatur is
“authorized by the APA is a basic proposition shared by
both sides of the debate over remand without vacatur.” M.
Sohoni, The Power To Vacate a Rule, 88 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1121,
1178 (2020).
7
Section 703 states: “The form
of proceeding for judicial review is the special statutory review
proceeding relevant to the subject matter in a court specified by
statute or, in the absence or inadequacy thereof, any applicable
form of legal action, including actions for declaratory judgments
or writs of prohibitory or mandatory injunction or habeas corpus,
in a court of competent jurisdiction. If no special statutory
review proceeding is applicable, the action for judicial review may
be brought against the United States, the agency by its official
title, or the appropriate officer. Except to the extent that prior,
adequate, and exclusive opportunity for judicial review is provided
by law, agency action is subject to judicial review in civil or
criminal proceedings for judicial enforcement.”
8
If the problem became
sufficiently severe, the Executive Branch could always ask Congress
to limit the remedies available under the APA.


