::decision_cite:: 22-1008
::decision_name::  Corner Post, Inc. v. Board of Governors
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1008

															_________________

															CORNER POST, INC., PETITIONER v. BOARD
OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eighth circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, with whom Justice Sotomayor
and Justice Kagan join, dissenting.

															More than half a century ago, this Court
highlighted the long-recognized “hazards inherent in attempting to
define for all purposes when a ‘cause of action’ first ‘accrues.’ ”
Crown Coat Front Co. v. United States, 386 U.S.
503, 517 (1967). Today, the majority throws that caution to the
wind and engages in the same kind of misguided reasoning about
statutory limitations periods that we have previously
admonished.

															The flawed reasoning and far-reaching results of
the Court’s ruling in this case are staggering. First, the
reasoning. The text and context of the relevant statutory
provisions plainly reveal that, for facial challenges to agency
regulations, the 6-year limitations period in 28 U. S. C. §2401(a)
starts running when the rule is published. The Court says otherwise
today, holding that the broad statutory term “accrues” requires us
to conclude that the limitations period for Administrative
Procedure Act (APA) claims runs from the time of a plaintiff ’s
injury. Never mind that this Court’s precedents tell us that the
meaning of “accrues” is context specific. Never mind that, in the
administrative-law context, limitations statutes uniformly run from
the moment of agency action. Never mind that a plaintiff ’s injury
is utterly irrelevant to a facial APA claim. According to the
Court, we must ignore all of this because, for other kinds of
claims, accrual begins at the time of a plaintiff ’s injury.

															Next, the results. The Court’s baseless
conclusion means that there is effectively no longer any
limitations period for lawsuits that challenge agency regulations
on their face. Allowing every new commercial entity to bring fresh
facial challenges to long-existing regulations is profoundly
destabilizing for both Government and businesses. It also allows
well-heeled litigants to game the system by creating new entities
or finding new plaintiffs whenever they blow past the statutory
deadline.

															The majority refuses to accept the
straightforward, commonsense, and singularly plausible reading of
the limitations statute that Congress wrote. In doing so, the Court
wreaks havoc on Government agencies, businesses, and society at
large. I respectfully dissent.

															I

															When a claim accrues depends on the nature of
the claim. See Crown Coat, 386 U. S., at 517. So,
understanding the context in which these claims arose is
essential to determining when Congress meant for them to accrue.
The facts of this very case illustrate the absurdity of the
majority’s one-size-fits-all approach. The procedural history is
also a prime example of the gamesmanship that statutory limitations
periods are enacted to prevent.

															A

															Start with the relevant agency regulation. In
2010, Congress required the Federal Reserve Board to issue rules
for debit-card transaction fees. See 15 U. S. C.
§1693o–2(a)(1). The Board did as Congress instructed. As
relevant here, in 2011, the Board issued Regulation II, capping
debit-card interchange fees at 21 cents per transaction plus 0.05
percent of the transaction. 76 Fed. Reg. 43420 (2011) (codified at
12 CFR §253.3(b) (2022)).

															As often happens, affected parties challenged
Regulation II almost immediately after the Board issued it Several
large trade groups sued under the APA, alleging that Regulation II
was, in several respects, arbitrary, capricious, and not in
accordance with law. NACS v. Board of Governors of
FRS, 958 F. Supp. 2d 85, 95–96 (DC 2013). Ultimately, the D. C.
Circuit rejected that challenge in relevant part. NACS v.
Board of Governors of FRS, 746 F.3d 474, 477 (2014). And, a
few months after that, we denied certiorari. See 574 U.S. 1121
(2015).

															B

															Now consider the facts of this challenge. In
the majority’s telling, this is about a single “truckstop and
convenience store located in Watford City, North Dakota.”
Ante, at 1.

															Not quite. Rather, two large trade groups
initially filed this action in 2021—a full decade after the Federal
Reserve Board finalized the debit-card-fee regulations at issue.
Those groups were the North Dakota Petroleum Marketers Association,
a “trade association that has existed since the mid-1950s,” and the
North Dakota Retail Association, another trade group. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 53. Corner Post, which had only opened its doors
in 2018, was not a party to the trade groups’ initial complaint.
The Government moved to dismiss the pleading, invoking §2401(a)’s
6-year statute of limitations. In response, the trade groups sought
leave to amend.

															It was only then that Corner Post was added as a
plaintiff. And, importantly, other than the addition of Corner
Post, the trade groups’ complaint remained practically identical to
the untimely one they had filed before. Other than a few changes of
phrasing and some newly available 2019 data, the amended complaint
alleged the same facts and sought the same relief as the original
pleading. It also included the exact same legal claims—verbatim.
The only material change to the amended complaint was the addition
of Corner Post.

															Thus, even before I analyze the statute of
limitations arguments, one can see that this case is the poster
child for the type of manipulation that the majority now
invites—new groups being brought in (or created) just to do an end
run around the statute of limitations.[1] To repeat: The claims in Corner Post’s lawsuit were not
new or in any way distinct (even in wording) from the pre-existing
and untimely claims of the trade organizations that had been around
for decades.

															This time, however, when the Government renewed
its motion to dismiss, the plaintiffs made the case all about
Corner Post. The plaintiffs argued that, because Corner Post had
not yet formed as a company when the Board issued Regulation II, it
simply could not be subjected to a 6-year limitations period that
ran from when the challenged regulation issued back in 2011. (One
wonders how a company that formed against the backdrop of a
long-settled rule could possibly be entitled to complain, or claim
injury, related to the regulatory environment in which it willingly
entered—but I digress.) Rather than accepting that the untimely
challenge remained so, Corner Post demanded a personalized,
plaintiff-specific limitations rule, giving an entity six years
from when it was first affected by a Government action to
file a facial challenge.

															The District Court rejected Corner Post’s
argument, following the lead of every court of appeals that had
ever addressed accrual of an APA facial challenge.[2] It held that the addition of Corner Post
as a plaintiff did not make a difference to the timeliness of the
business groups’ claims. The Eighth Circuit affirmed, holding that
“when plaintiffs bring a facial challenge to a final agency action,
the right of action accrues, and the limitations period begins to
run, upon publication of the regulation.” North Dakota Retail
Assn. v. Board of Governors of FRS, 55 F. 4th 634, 641
(2022).

															II

															But here we are. Three-quarters of a century
after Congress enacted the APA, a majority of this Court rejects
the consensus view that, for facial challenges to agency rules, the
statutory 6-year limitations period runs from the publication of
the rule. Instead, it holds that an APA claim accrues “when the
plaintiff is injured by final agency action.” Ante, at 1.
The majority maintains that the text of §2401(a) demands this
result. But if that answer is so obvious, one wonders why no court
proclaimed it until more than 75 years after all the statutory
pieces were in place.

															To explain how the majority got this ruling
wrong, I find it necessary to provide the right answer. Here, the
relevant statutory text is the catchall limitations provision for
suits brought against the United States: §2401(a) of Title 28 of
the United States Code. All agree that there are two key terms in
that provision—“accrues” and “the right of action.” Ibid.
The majority misreads both. Contrary to the Court’s rigid reading,
the word “accrues” lacks any fixed meaning. See Crown Coat,
386 U. S., at 517. Instead, the meaning of accrue for the purpose
of a statute of limitations is determined by the particular “right
of action” at issue. For many kinds of legal claims, accrual is
plaintiff specific because the claims themselves are plaintiff
specific. But facial administrative-law claims are not. This means
that, in the administrative-law context, the limitations period
begins not when a plaintiff is injured, but when a rule is
finalized.

															A

															When sovereign immunity has been waived, the
Federal Government is often sued, and Congress has enacted statutes
of limitations to ensure that those lawsuits are brought in a
timely fashion. Because such suits arise in different contexts,
Congress has enacted different statutes of limitations for
different types of suits.

															Most statutes of limitations are context
specific. For example, a tort claim against the United States
typically must be brought “within two years after such claim
accrues.” 28 U. S. C. §2401(b). By contrast, a party challenging
certain administrative orders must seek review “within 60 days
after [the order’s] entry.” §2344. Many more examples of
context-specific limitations periods in the U. S. Code abound. See,
e.g., §2501 (claims over which the United States
Court of Federal Claims has jurisdiction must be brought within six
years); 33 U. S. C. §1369(b)(1) (challenges to certain standards
adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency under the Clean
Water Act must commence “within 120 days from the date of . . .
promulgation”).

															The statute at issue here—28 U. S. C.
§2401(a)—supplements those specific provisions. In doing so,
§2401(a) serves a special purpose: to act as a catchall that
imposes an outer time limit on claims brought against the United
States when no other statute of limitations applies. Under
§2401(a), “every civil action commenced against the United States
shall be barred unless the complaint is filed within six years
after the right of action first accrues.” This catchall limitations
statute has been applied in a range of contexts, including APA
claims (like this one), contract claims, see Crown Coat, 386
U. S., at 510–511, and more, see, e.g., Natural
Resources Defense Council v. Haaland, 102 F. 4th 1045,
1074 (CA9 2024) (claims under the Endangered Species Act).

															Consistent with the broad scope of its potential
application, §2401(a) uses broad language. It starts the 6-year
clock when “the right of action first accrues.” §2401(a). No more
elaboration or specificity is given. So, what does the
sparse text of §2401(a) tell us?

															To start, the statute tells us to look at when
“the right of action first accrues.” (Emphasis added.) The
word “first” directs us to start the clock at the earliest possible
opportunity once the claim accrues. From the text alone, then, we
know that this moment in time should happen sooner rather than
later. But when that moment occurs depends on the meaning of
both “the right of action” and “accrues.”

															Next, the provision uses the unadorned phrase
“the right of action.” Because this statute is applicable to a
broad range of causes of action against the Government, the
underlying statute (here the APA) provides “the right of action,”
not §2401(a) itself. Put another way, the §2401(a) catchall applies
to different causes of action, and those causes of action establish
different legal claims. Though the right of action is not the same
for an APA claim as it is for an Endangered Species Act claim,
§2401(a)’s broad “right of action” language applies to both of
these claims, and more.

															B

															A proper understanding of the word “accrues”
makes clear that this term is far more flexible and context
dependent than the majority appreciates. Crucially, the Court has
said this very thing before—more than once, in fact. We have long
understood that it is simply not “possible to assign the word
‘accrued’ any definite technical meaning which by itself would
enable us to say whether the statutory period begins to run at one
time or the other.” Reading Co. v. Koons, 271 U.S.
58, 61–62 (1926); see also Crown Coat, 386 U. S., at 517
(recognizing “the hazards inherent in attempting to define for all
purposes when a ‘cause of action’ first ‘accrues’ ”).

															But, for some reason, that does not stop the
majority from trying here. Its opinion repeatedly asserts that the
ordinary meaning of accrual is that claims accrue only when a
plaintiff can sue. See ante, at 6–10.[3] But even the majority acknowledges that its
preferred definition of accrual is not universal; it is, at most,
“the ‘standard rule’ ” that “can be displaced.” Ante,
at 8 (quoting Green v. Brennan, 578 U.S. 547, 554
(2016); emphasis added).

															Far from imposing a one-size-fits-all definition
of the word “accrue,” this Court has traditionally taken a
claim-specific view: “[A] right accrues when it comes into
existence. ” United States v. Lindsay, 346 U.S.
568, 569 (1954). For example, in McMahon v. United
States, 342 U.S.
25 (1951), we held that, under the Suits in Admiralty Act, a
claim accrued when a seaman was injured, even though he could not
yet sue at that time. See id., at 27–28. In Crown
Coat, we held the opposite—a claim brought under 28 U. S. C.
§1346 did not accrue at the time of injury, but rather at the
moment of final administrative action, because a plaintiff could
not sue until the agency action was final. See 386 U. S., at
513–514, 517–518. The point is not that these cases all
point in one direction or the other with respect to the meaning of
accrue. Instead, our cases illustrate what this Court has expressly
stated: The term “accrued” lacks “any definite technical meaning,”
Reading, 271 U. S., at 61.

															The majority nevertheless decrees today that
accrual must always be plaintiff specific—i.e., that a claim
cannot accrue until “this particular plaintiff ” can bring suit.
Ante, at 14. But that is not what §2401(a) says. It does not
say that the clock starts when the plaintiff ’s right of
action first accrues; rather, §2401(a) starts the clock when
“the right of action first accrues.” (Emphasis added.) In
other words, the limitations provision here focuses on the claim
being brought without regard for who brings it.

															The dictionary definitions on which the majority
relies further highlight this important observation. A claim
accrues, according to those definitions, “ ‘when a suit may
be maintained thereon’ ” or upon the “ ‘coming or springing into
existence of a right to sue.’ ” Ante, at 7 (emphasis
added) (first quoting Black’s Law Dictionary 37 (4th ed. 1951),
then quoting Ballentine’s Law Dictionary 15–16 (2d ed. 1948)).
Again, and notably, these dictionaries speak of a right to
sue, not the plaintiff ’s right to sue. Like §2401(a)
itself, these definitions do not support the majority’s assertion
that accrual is necessarily plaintiff specific.

															Of course, many of our cases do say that
a claim accrues when “ ‘the plaintiff has a complete and present
cause of action.’ ” E.g., Gabelli v.
SEC, 568 U.S.
442, 448 (2013); Wallace v. Kato, 549 U.S.
384, 388 (2007); Graham County Soil & Water Conservation
Dist. v. United States ex rel. Wilson, 545 U.S.
409, 418 (2005); Bay Area Laundry and Dry Cleaning Pension
Trust Fund v. Ferbar Corp. of Cal., 522 U.S.
192, 201 (1997). But those statements were made in the context
of particular cases, each of which dealt with plaintiff-specific
causes of action. See, e.g., Gabelli, 568 U.
S., at 446 (civil enforcement claim by the Securities and Exchange
Commission); Wallace, 549 U. S., at 388 (false imprisonment
and arrest claims); Graham County, 545 U. S., at 412
(retaliation claim against an employer); Bay Area Laundry,
522 U. S., at 195 (claim alleging failure to make required payments
to employee pension funds).

															Here is what I mean by this. When a complaint
brought against a defendant asserts, “You falsely imprisoned me,”
or “You retaliated against me,” it is making a legal claim that is
specific to the particular plaintiff. But, as discussed below, it
is not similarly plaintiff specific to bring a claim saying, for
example, that a particular regulation is invalid because it
“exceeds the Board’s statutory authority,” or because the
Government “failed to consider important aspects of the problem,”
as the complaint here alleges. App. to Pet. for Cert. 80, 82. So,
while accrual may sometimes—even usually—be plaintiff specific,
that is just because underlying legal claims are often plaintiff
specific. The precedents the majority cites never say otherwise;
i.e., they do not tell us that accrual must
always be plaintiff specific.

															The majority’s other hard-and-fast
distinction—between statutes of limitations and statutes of
repose—fares no better. See ante, at 9–10. The majority sets
up a dichotomy: Statutes of limitations are plaintiff-centric rules
that “ ‘require plaintiffs to pursue diligent prosecution of known
claims,’ ” while statutes of repose emphasize finality and are tied
to “ ‘the last culpable act or omission of the defendant.’ ”
Ante, at 9 (quoting CTS Corp. v. Waldburger,
573 U.S.
1, 8 (2014)). The problem is that statutes of limitations and
statutes of repose, while different, are not nearly as different as
the majority imagines. It is true that statutes of repose are
considered to be “defendant-protective.” Ante, at 10. But
the same is true of statutes of limitations. “The very purpose of a
period of limitation is that there may be, at some definitely
ascertainable period, an end to litigation.” Reading, 271 U.
S., at 65; see also Gabelli, 568 U. S., at 448 (repose is a
“ ‘basic polic[y] of all limitations provisions’ ”). In fact,
according to one of the dictionaries the majority cites,
“[s]tatutes of limitation are statutes of repose.” Black’s
Law Dictionary, at 1077 (emphasis added). The difference is that
unlike statutes of repose, statutes of limitations have more than
one purpose: they bring finality for defendants and prevent
plaintiffs from sleeping on their rights. Understanding these dual
functions sheds no light whatsoever on what to do when those
competing purposes point in different directions.[4]

															III

															Because different claims accrue at different
times, we must look to the specific types of claims that the
plaintiffs have brought and consider the context in which the
limitations period operates. “Cases under [one statute] do not
necessarily rule . . . claims” brought under another. Crown
Coat, 386 U. S., at 517. And our understanding of accrual for
limitations purposes has always been context specific. See,
e.g., Wallace, 549 U. S., at 389 (relying on
torts treatises to explain the “distinctive rule” for commencement
of limitations period for false imprisonment suits); Franconia
Associates v. United States, 536
U.S. 129, 142–144 (2002) (citing contracts treatises to explain
that contract claims accrue at the moment of breach); Merck
& Co. v. Reynolds, 559 U.S.
633, 644–646 (2010) (applying fraud-specific discovery rule to
determine accrual). In other words, to understand when “the right
of action” accrues under §2401(a), we must understand what the
right of action is.

															A

															The right of action that is invoked in many
administrative-law cases, including this one, is a statutory claim
that an agency has violated certain legal requirements when it took
a certain action, such that the agency’s action itself is invalid.
See, e.g., 5 U. S. C. §706(2). And Congress has repeatedly
made clear, through various statutory enactments, that in the
administrative-law context, the statute of limitations for filing a
claim that seeks to invalidate the agency action runs from the
moment of final agency action.

															Take the Administrative Orders Review Act (also
known as the Hobbs Act), for example. See 28 U. S. C. §2342. That
statute is the exclusive mechanism for reviewing certain orders
issued by over a half-dozen federal agencies. The Act requires
suits to be brought “within 60 days after [the] entry” of any final
agency order. §2344. There are many other similar statutes. In its
brief, the Government provided us with more than two dozen
statutory provisions where the limitations period starts running at
the moment of final agency action—whether that action is the
publication of a rule, or the issuance of an order, or something
else. See Brief for Respondent 15–17, and n. 4. And, as the
Government itself acknowledges, even that list is not
comprehensive. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 51 (“Candidly, we got to a
page-long footnote and stopped”).[5]

															Despite the dozens of statutes that start the
limitations period at the moment of final agency action, neither
Corner Post nor the majority identifies a single statute in the
administrative-law context—either now or before 1948—that takes any
other approach. This tells us exactly the message that Congress
might have expected courts to infer when interpreting §2401(a): For
administrative-law actions, a claim accrues at the moment of final
agency action.

															The Court says we must ignore these other
statutes because they post-date Congress’s 1948 enactment of
§2401(a). See ante, at 12–14. The majority’s reasoning is
doubly wrong. First, it is wrong on the facts. Even before 1948,
Congress consistently started limitations periods in the
administrative-law context at the moment of the last agency
action.[6] Then, as now,
Congress decided that the deadline for reviewing agency actions
should be pegged to the action under review. Second, the majority
misses the broader point: Whenever Congress imposes a deadline to
challenge an agency decision, the limitations period always starts
at the moment of the last agency action. We should pay attention to
the uniformly expressed judgment of Congress, and read §2401(a)
accordingly.

															Somehow, the majority draws the opposite
conclusion. In its view, either Congress’s consistently expressed
intention is irrelevant to what §2401(a) means, or Congress’s
failure to explicitly express that intention in the text of
§2401(a) indicates that Congress decided otherwise in this
particular statute (after all, Congress could have expressly pegged
accrual to final agency action in §2401(a) but did not do so). See
ante, at 8–10. [7] But
mechanically drawing these sorts of negative inferences when
interpreting statutes can be risky. “Context counts, and it is
sometimes difficult to read much into the absence of a word that is
present elsewhere in a statute.” Bartenwerfer v.
Buckley, 598 U.S. 69, 78 (2023).

															The majority’s approach overlooks relevant
context in all sorts of ways, including the fact that §2401(a) is a
catchall provision that applies to a variety of actions—that is,
the language we are interpreting here does not apply only in
the administrative-law context. It applies to every suit
against the United States not covered by another statute of
limitations. One cannot expect for Congress to have explicitly
stated that accrual in §2401(a) starts at the point of final agency
action when §2401(a) is a residual provision that also applies to
claims that do not involve agency action at all.[8]

															Frankly, it was also entirely unnecessary for
Congress to be explicit regarding its intentions. Again, in the
administrative-law context, the consistent rule is not the
plaintiff-specific accrual rule that exists in other contexts
(e.g., torts), but the rule that applies every time Congress
has ever mentioned a limitations period with respect to a suit
against an agency: The claim accrues at the moment of final agency
action. So it is no wonder that Congress did not expressly mention
this in the text of §2401(a)—it did not have to, for those who have
a basic understanding of its statutes.

															What is more, the standard accrual rule for the
administrative-law context makes perfect sense. The APA itself
focuses on the agency’s action, not on the plaintiff. Section 704
subjects certain “agency action[s]” to judicial review. Section 706
lays out the scope of judicial review. As relevant here, courts
shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action” that is
“arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in
accordance with law.” 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A). Other subsections of
§706 likewise focus exclusively on what the agency did. Did
the agency act “in excess of statutory jurisdiction”?
§706(2)(C). Did the agency act “without observance of
procedure required by law”? §706(2)(D).

															Section 702 is not to the contrary. The majority
suggests otherwise, characterizing §702 as “equip[ping] injured
parties with a cause of action.” Ante, at 5. This is a
misleading characterization. Section 702 restricts who may
challenge agency action: only those “person[s] suffering legal
wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved
by agency action.” It is simply a limitation on who can sue. As
such, it says nothing about the cause of action that such a person
might bring, nor does it establish that an injury is an element of
the claim, as the majority mistakenly suggests.[9] And that is for good reason, since, in
administrative actions, the claim itself remains focused on the
agency. See Crown Coat, 386 U. S., at 513 (“The focus of the
court action is the validity of the administrative decision”).

															The way that courts review agency actions also
reinforces this basic observation. Courts do not look at what
happened to the plaintiff or what happened after the
rulemaking—they look only at the rule and the rulemaking process
itself. See SEC v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.S.
80, 95 (1943). “[T]he focal point for judicial review should be
the administrative record already in existence, not some new record
made initially in the reviewing court.” Camp v.
Pitts, 411 U.S.
138, 142 (1973) (per curiam). Anything that happened
after the rule’s publication (including, perhaps, some injury to a
regulated party) does not matter to an APA claim. So, the available
claims, causes of action, and evidence are the same regardless of
who brings the challenge or when they bring it.

															Again, the complaint in this case proves the
point. Before Corner Post was added as a plaintiff, the complaint
alleged that (1) Regulation II is contrary to law and exceeds the
Board’s statutory authority, and (2) Regulation II is arbitrary and
capricious. See Complaint in North Dakota Retail Assn. v.
Board of Governors of FRS, No. 1:21–cv–00095 (D ND),
ECF Doc. 1, pp. 32–36. After Corner Post was added as a plaintiff,
the complaint made exactly those same two legal claims. See App. to
Pet. for Cert. 79–84. Before Corner Post was added, the
contrary-to-law claim said that the Board considered impermissible
costs and capped interchange fees in a way that was not
proportional to the specific costs of each transaction. See ECF
Doc. 1, at 32–34. After Corner Post was added, the contrary-to-law
claim said the exact same thing. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 79–81.
Before the addition of Corner Post, the arbitrary-and-capricious
claim said that the Board failed to consider certain congressional
instructions, relied on factors that Congress did not intend for it
to consider, and ran counter to evidence before the Board. See ECF
Doc. 1, at 34–36. Those claims, too, were unchanged after the
addition of Corner Post. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 82–84.

															From the pleadings filed in this case, three
observations stand out. First, these APA claims, like all APA
claims, are about what the agency itself did, so the logical point
to start the clock is the moment the agency acted. Second, the
claims that Corner Post brings are not specific to it—they are
identical to the untimely claims the coplaintiff trade groups
brought before. And, finally, although the majority puts procedural
challenges to the side—asserting that its holding does not extend
to those, see ante, at 21, n. 8—the claims in this case
are procedural, so the majority’s line-drawing exercise is
meaningless.

															B

															On the matter of congressional intent, the
consistent accrual rule in the administrative-law context (the
limitations period starts running at the time of the final agency
action) is patently superior to the majority’s reading of §2401(a).
Congress enacts statutes of limitations to achieve basic policy
goals: “repose, elimination of stale claims, and certainty about a
plaintiff ’s opportunity for recovery and a defendant’s potential
liabilities.” Rotella v. Wood, 528 U.S.
549, 555 (2000); see also Gabelli, 568 U. S., at 448.
For APA claims, where rulemakings apply to the public writ large,
repose and certainty would never exist if any and every
newly formed entity can challenge every agency regulation in
existence. Stated simply, the majority has adopted an implausible
reading of §2401(a), because, as I explain below, a
plaintiff-specific accrual rule operating in this context
undermines each of the central goals of all limitations
provisions.

															First, repose. This principle means that, at
some point, litigation must end. Under the majority’s reading of
the statute, it never will. Instead of putting a stop to things
after six years, §2401(a) now does nothing to prevent agency rules
from being forever subjected to legal challenge by newly formed
entities (or, as this case illustrates, by old entities that can
find or create new entities to graft onto their
complaint).[10]

															Second, elimination of stale claims. The
majority forces courts and agencies to parse cold administrative
records. Long after the action in question, courts may be ill
equipped to review decades-old administrative explanations.

															Last, certainty. As I explain in Part IV,
infra, the majority’s approach creates uncertainty for the
Government and every entity that relies on the Government to
function. Agency rulemaking serves important “notice and
predictability purposes.” Talk America, Inc. v. Michigan
Bell Telephone Co., 564 U.S.
50, 69 (2011) (Scalia, J., concurring). When an administrative
agency changes its own rules, it follows specific, established
processes, so parties have some predictability about how the rules
of the road might change. But when every rule on the books can
perpetually be challenged by any new plaintiff, and is thus subject
to limitless ad hoc amendment, no policy determination can ever be
put to rest, and certainty about the rules that govern will forever
remain elusive.

															IV

															Today’s ruling is not only baseless. It is
also extraordinarily consequential. In one fell swoop, the Court
has effectively eliminated any limitations period for APA lawsuits,
despite Congress’s unmistakable policy determination to cut off
such suits within six years of the final agency action. The Court
has decided that the clock starts for limitations purposes whenever
a new regulated entity is created. This means that, from this day
forward, administrative agencies can be sued in perpetuity over
every final decision they make.

															The majority’s ruling makes legal challenges to
decades-old agency decisions fair game, even though courts of
appeals had previously applied §2401(a) to find untimely a range of
belated APA challenges. For example, a lower court rejected an APA
challenge to the Food and Drug Administration’s approval of the
abortion medication mifepristone that was brought more than two
decades after the relevant agency action. See Alliance for
Hippocratic Medicine v. FDA, 78 F. 4th 210, 242 (CA5
2023). A 2008 APA challenge to a 1969 ruling by the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives implementing the Gun
Control Act was also bounced on statute of limitations grounds. See
Hire Order Ltd. v. Marianos, 698 F.3d 168, 170 (CA4
2012). Other unquestionably tardy APA suits have been dismissed on
similar grounds too.[11]

															No more. After today, even the most well-settled
agency regulations can be placed on the chopping block. And please
take note: The fallout will not stop with new challenges to old
rules involving the most contentious issues of today. Any
established government regulation about any issue—say,
workplace safety, toxic waste, or consumer protection—can now be
attacked by any new regulated entity within six years of the
entity’s formation. A brand new entity could pop up and challenge a
regulation that is decades old; perhaps even one that is as
old as the APA itself. No matter how entrenched, heavily relied
upon, or central to the functioning of our society a rule is, the
majority has announced open season.

															Still, in issuing its ruling in this case, the
Court seems oddly oblivious to the most foreseeable consequence of
the accrual rule it is adopting: Giving every new entity in a
regulated industry its own personal statute of limitations to
challenge longstanding regulations affects our Nation’s economy.
Why? Because administrative agencies establish the baseline rules
around which businesses and individuals order their lives. When an
agency publishes a final rule, and the period for challenging that
rule passes, people in that industry understand that the agency’s
policy choice is the law and act accordingly. They make investments
because of it. They change their practices because of it. They
enter contracts in light of it. They may not like the rule, but
they live and work with it, because that is what the Rule of Law
requires. It is profoundly destabilizing—and also acutely unfair—to
permit newcomers to bring legal challenges that can overturn
settled regulations long after the rest of the competitive
marketplace has adapted itself to the regulatory environment.

															Moreover, as I have explained, the Court’s
ruling in this case allows for every new entity to challenge any
and every rule that an agency has ever adopted. It is
extraordinarily presumptuous that an entity formed in full view of
an agency’s rules, by founders who can choose to enter the industry
or not, can demand that well-established rules of engagement be
revisited. But even setting aside those commonsense fairness
concerns, the constant churn of potential attacks on an agency’s
rules by new entrants can harm all entities in a regulated
industry. At any time, anyone can come along and potentially cause
every entity to have to adjust its whole operations manual, since
any rule (no matter how well settled) might be subject to
alteration. Indeed, the obvious need for stability in the rules
that govern an industry is precisely why a defined period for
challenging the rules was needed at all.

															Knowledgeable amici have explained that
the majority’s approach to accrual of the statute of limitations
for APA claims undermines the “[s]tability, predictability, and
consistency [that] enable[s] small businesses to survive and
thrive.” Brief for Small Business Associations as Amici
Curiae 5. And there is no question that long-term uncertainty
“hinders the ability of businesses to plan effectively.”
Id., at 9. The majority’s accrual rule unnecessarily creates
“frequent, inconsistent, judicially-driven policy changes that do
not involve the sort of careful balancing envisioned in the normal
process of regulatory change.” Id., at 12. And, again, one
might think that preventing such chaos is precisely why Congress
enacted a statute of limitations in the first place.

															Seeking to minimize the fully foreseeable and
potentially devastating impact of its ruling, the majority
maintains that there is nothing to see here, because not every
lawsuit brought by a new industry upstart will win, and, at any
rate, many agency regulations are already subject to challenge. See
ante, at 21. But this myopic rationalization overlooks other
significant changes that this Court has wrought this Term with
respect to the longstanding rules governing review of agency
actions. The discerning reader will know that the Court has handed
down other decisions this Term that likewise invite and enable a
wave of regulatory challenges—decisions that carry with them the
possibility that well-established agency rules will be upended in
ways that were previously unimaginable. Doctrines that were once
settled are now unsettled, and claims that lacked merit a year ago
are suddenly up for grabs.

															In Loper Bright Enterprises v.
Raimondo, 603 U. S. ___ (2024), for example, the Court has
reneged on a blackletter rule of administrative law that had been
foundational for the last four decades. Id., at ___ (slip
op., at 30). Under that prior interpretive doctrine, courts
deferred to agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes that
Congress authorized the agency to administer. Now, every legal
claim conceived of in those last four decades—and before—can
possibly be brought before courts newly unleashed from the
constraints of any such deference. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 74
(Assistant to the Solicitor General explaining that this result
“would magnify the effect of” overruling Chevron).

															Put differently, a fixed statute of limitations,
running from the agency’s action, was one barrier to the chaotic
upending of settled agency rules; the requirement that deference be
given to an agency’s reasonable interpretations concerning its
statutory authority to issue rules was another. The Court has now
eliminated both. Any new objection to any old rule must be
entertained and determined de novo by judges who can now
apply their own unfettered judgment as to whether the rule should
be voided.

															*  *  *

															At the end of a momentous Term, this much is
clear: The tsunami of lawsuits against agencies that the Court’s
holdings in this case and Loper Bright have authorized has
the potential to devastate the functioning of the Federal
Government. Even more to the present point, that result simply
cannot be what Congress intended when it enacted legislation that
stood up and funded federal agencies and vested them with authority
to set the ground rules for the individuals and entities that
participate in the our economy and our society. It is utterly
inconceivable that §2401(a)’s statute of limitations was meant to
permit fresh attacks on settled regulations from all new comers
forever. Yet, that is what the majority holds today.

															But Congress still has a chance to address this
absurdity and forestall the coming chaos. It can opt to correct
this Court’s mistake by clarifying that the statutes it enacts are
designed to facilitate the functioning of agencies, not to hobble
them. In particular, Congress can amend §2401(a), or enact a
specific review provision for APA claims, to state explicitly what
any such rule must mean if it is to operate as a limitations
period in this context: Regulated entities have six years from the
date of the agency action to bring a lawsuit seeking to have it
changed or invalidated; after that, facial challenges must end. By
doing this, Congress can make clear that lawsuits bringing facial
claims against agencies are not personal attack vehicles for new
entities created just for that purpose. So, while the Court has
made a mess of this pivotal statute, and the consequences are
profound, “the ball is in Congress’ court.” Ledbetter v.
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 550
U.S. 618, 661 (2007) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting).

Notes
1
If this case illustrates one
type of gamesmanship, one does not need to think hard to imagine
other examples. A cash-only business that announces its intent to
accept debit cards and thereby claiming injury from the debit-card
rule. New owners that buy out a shop, insisting that they too are
entitled to challenge the debit-card rule based on their status as
new entrants into the marketplace. It is telling that, even as the
majority says that the moment of the plaintiff ’s injury marks the
start of the limitations period for facial APA challenges, the
majority fails to describe precisely when that injury occurs in
this context.
2
The majority’s opinion says we
took this case to resolve a circuit split, suggesting that the
Sixth Circuit had reached the contrary conclusion. See ante,
at 3–4. It had not. In Herr v. United States Forest
Serv., 803 F.3d 809 (2015), the Sixth Circuit addressed accrual
in the context of an as-applied challenge after the
Government had threatened enforcement. There, the Circuit pegged
accrual to the moment of the injury allegedly caused by application
of the rule to the plaintiff, see id., at 820, and did not
discuss whether that same accrual rule would apply to facial
challenges. Since Herr, neither the Sixth Circuit nor any
district court within it has extended Herr’s rule to facial
challenges to final agency actions, and at least one District Court
has expressly rejected such an extension. See Linney’s Pizza,
LLC v. Board of Governors of FRS, 2023 WL 6050569, *2–*4
(ED Ky., Sept. 15, 2023).
3
The majority insists on a
single definition of “accrued,” but it cannot keep its story
straight as to what that definition is. Its opinion offers multiple
formulations, stating that a claim accrues “when it comes into
existence,” “when the plaintiff has a complete and present cause of
action,” “when a suit may be maintained thereon,” and, also, “after
the plaintiff suffers the injury.” Ante, at 7–8 (internal
quotation marks omitted). These distinctions can make a
difference.
4
Here, these purposes are at
odds because repose favors starting the clock at the moment of
final agency action, whereas a plaintiff-specific limitations rule
would be targeted at a plaintiff’s injury to ensure plaintiffs
don’t sleep on their rights. In the administrative-law context, one
has to choose between those objectives; no one rule can equally
achieve both of these ends.
5
No kidding. On top of the
dozens of examples that the Government provided, there are many,
many others. See, e.g., 5 U. S. C. §7703(b)(1)(A)
(“[A] petition to review a final order or final decision of the
[Merit Systems Protection] Board shall be filed . . . within 60
days after the Board issues notice of the final order or decision
of the Board”); 15 U. S. C. §80b–13(a) (“Any person or party
aggrieved by an order issued by the [Securities and Exchange]
Commission under this subchapter may obtain a review of such order
. . . by filing . . . within sixty days after the entry of such
order, a written petition”); 30 U. S. C. §1276(a)(2) (“Any
[covered] order or decision . . . shall be subject to judicial
review on or before 30 days from the date of such order or
decision”); 38 U. S. C. §7266(a) (“[T]o obtain review . . . of a
final decision of the Board of Veterans’ Appeals, a person
adversely affected by such decision shall file a notice of appeal
with the Court within 120 days after the date on which notice of
the decision is issued”); 42 U. S. C. §405(g) (“Any individual,
after any final decision of the Commissioner of Social Security
made after a hearing to which he was a party . . . may obtain a
review of such decision by a civil action commenced within sixty
days after the mailing to him of notice of such decision”);
§1395oo(f )(1) (“Providers shall have the right to obtain
judicial review of any final decision of the [Provider
Reimbursement Review] Board . . . by a civil action commenced
within 60 days of the date on which notice of any final decision by
the Board . . . is received”); §7607(b)(1) (“Any petition for
review under this subsection shall be filed within sixty days from
the date notice of such promulgation, approval, or action appears
in the Federal Register, except that if such petition is based
solely on grounds arising after such sixtieth day, then any
petition for review under this subsection shall be filed within
sixty days after such grounds arise”); 49 U. S. C. §1153(b)(1)
(petitions seeking review of National Transportation Safety Board
orders that relate to aviation matters “must be filed not later
than 60 days after the order is issued”).
6
See, e.g., 42
Stat. 162 (1921) (codified at 7 U. S. C. §194(a)) (meatpackers must
appeal agency orders within 30 days after service of order); 48
Stat. 1093 (1934) (codified as amended at 47 U. S. C. §402(c))
(Federal Communications Commission orders must be challenged in
court “within twenty days after the decision complained of is
effective”); 49 Stat. 860 (1935) (codified at 16 U. S. C.
§825l(b)) (orders issued by the Federal Power Commission
pursuant to the Public Utility Act of 1935 must be challenged in
court “within sixty days after the order of the Commission”); 49
Stat. 980 (1935) (codified at 27 U. S. C. §204(h)) (orders related
to alcohol permits must be challenged “within sixty days after the
entry of such order”); 52 Stat. 112 (1938) (codified at 15 U. S. C.
§45) (Federal Trade Commission cease-and-desist orders must be
challenged “within sixty days from the date of the service of such
order”); 52 Stat. 831 (1938) (codified at 15 U. S. C. §717r(b))
(orders issued by the Federal Power Commission pursuant to the
Natural Gas Act must be challenged in court “within sixty days
after the order of the Commission”); 52 Stat. 1053 (1938) (codified
at 21 U. S. C. §355(h)) (orders related to new drug applications
must be challenged in court “within sixty days after the entry of
such order”); 54 Stat. 501 (1940) (orders apportioning costs for
certain bridge projects must be challenged in court “within three
months after the date such order is issued”).
7
The majority criticizes my
review of congressional action in this area, but fails to
adequately explore the record itself. Ante, at 12–14. The
majority’s conclusion that the accrual rule is plaintiff specific
for APA claims is no more than ipse dixit.
8
Contra the majority, see
ante, at 12, the fact that Congress could have opted
to enact a specific statutory review provision for APA claims says
nothing about how we should apply the catchall review provision
here.
9
The majority puts too much
stock in the fact that §702 references an injury: That reference
actually does no more than highlight the distinction between what
constitutes a claim and who can bring that claim. See ante,
at 4–5, and n. 1. This type of distinction is commonplace in many
areas of our jurisprudence. Take, for example, the constitutional
standing doctrine, which limits eligible plaintiffs to those who
have suffered an injury in fact that is both traceable to the
defendant’s conduct and redressable in court. See FDA v.
Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine, 602 U.S. 367, 380–385
(2024). Whether a particular plaintiff has standing to sue says
nothing about the elements of the claim itself. See Haaland
v. Brackeen, 599 U.S. 255, 291 (2023) (“We do not reach the
merits of these claims because no party before the Court has
standing to raise them”). The distinction between what a claim is
and who can bring it applies with full force here. Section 702
codifies an injury requirement for bringing APA claims. Whether a
particular plaintiff was “adversely affected or aggrieved by agency
action within the meaning of a relevant statute” under §702 is a
threshold inquiry about whether she is an appropriate plaintiff; it
has no bearing on whether the agency did, in fact, act in a manner
that was “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or
otherwise not in accordance with law,” §706(2).
10 The fact
that “courts entertaining later challenges often will be able to
rely on binding Supreme Court or circuit precedent,” ante,
at 21, is irrelevant. What we are deciding now is how the statute
of limitations should be interpreted, and more specifically,
whether it makes sense to interpret it in a way that is
inconsistent with the purpose of such statutes.
11 See,
e.g., Alabama v. PCI Gaming Auth., 801
F.3d 1278, 1292 (CA11 2015) (2013 challenge to Secretary of
Interior’s 1984, 1992, and 1995 decisions to take certain land into
trust for tribes); Wong v. Doar, 571 F.3d 247, 263
(CA2 2009) (2007 challenge to 1980 Medicaid regulation);
Dunn-McCampbell Royalty Interest, Inc. v. National Park
Serv., 
112 F.3d 1283, 1286–1287 (CA5 1997) (1994 challenge to 1979
National Park Service regulations); Shiny Rock Mining Corp.
v. United States, 906 F.2d 1362, 1365–1366 (CA9 1990) (1984
challenges to 1964 and 1965 land management orders).


