::decision_cite:: 22-193
::decision_name::  Muldrow v. City of St. Louis
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kavanaugh
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–193

															_________________

															Jatonya Clayborn Muldrow, PETITIONER v.
City of St. Louis, Missouri, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eighth circuit

															[April 17, 2024]

															

															Justice Kavanaugh, concurring in the
judgment.

															Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes
it unlawful for an employer “to discriminate against any individual
with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges
of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin.” 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(a)(1). The
question presented in this case is whether transferring an
employee—for example, changing an employee’s job responsibilities
or job location—on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin violates Title VII. The answer is yes.

															I therefore agree with the straightforward
opinion jointly authored by Judge Tatel and Judge Ginsburg for the
en banc D. C. Circuit. See Chambers v. District of
Columbia, 35 F. 4th 870 (2022). As that court explained,
even when a transfer does not change an employee’s compensation, a
transfer does change the employee’s terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment. See id., at 874–879. Therefore, a
transfer made on the basis of the employee’s race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin violates Title VII. See id., at
874–875.

															As I see it and as the D. C. Circuit saw
it, the issue here is not complicated. Suppose that an employer
says to an employee in the Columbus office: “We are transferring
you to the Cincinnati office because you are black. But your
compensation will not change.” Does that violate Title VII? Of
course it does. To begin with, the employer has treated the
employee differently because of race. To be sure, the fact that a
transfer may not involve a change in compensation can affect the
amount of any damages, as Muldrow’s attorney acknowledged. See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 41–42. But a transfer changes the terms, conditions,
or privileges of employment. Therefore, a discriminatory transfer
violates the statute. “The plain text of Title VII requires no
more.” Chambers, 35 F. 4th, at 875.[1]

															Unlike the D. C. Circuit, some Courts of
Appeals have held that discriminatory transfers are not prohibited
by Title VII unless the transfer also causes significant employment
disadvantage. Ante, at 4–5, n. 1. Today, this Court
definitively rejects those rulings. Ante, at 6, 7,
n. 2. I fully agree with the Court on that point.

															But the Court’s opinion then goes on to require
that a plaintiff in a discriminatory-transfer case show at least
“some harm” beyond the harm of being transferred on the basis of
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Ante, at 6.
I disagree with the Court’s new some-harm requirement. No court has
adopted a some-harm requirement, and no party or amicus
advocated that requirement to this Court. More to the point, the
text of Title VII does not require a separate showing of some harm.
The discrimination is harm. The only question then is whether the
relevant employment action changes the compensation, terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment. A transfer does so.
Therefore, as the D. C. Circuit explained, a transfer on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is
actionable under Title VII. Chambers, 35 F. 4th, at
874–879.

															All of that said, the Court’s new some-harm
requirement appears to be a relatively low bar. Importantly, the
Court emphasizes that “some harm” is less than significant harm,
serious harm, or substantial harm. Ante, at 6. Therefore,
anyone who has been transferred because of race, color, religion,
sex, or national origin should easily be able to show some
additional harm—whether in money, time, satisfaction, schedule,
convenience, commuting costs or time, prestige, status, career
prospects, interest level, perks, professional relationships,
networking opportunities, effects on family obligations, or the
like. So even though I respectfully disagree with the Court’s new
some-harm requirement, I expect that the Court’s approach and my
preferred approach will land in the same place and lead to the same
result in 99 out of 100 discriminatory-transfer cases, if not in
all 100.

Notes
1
 To be sure, the
employment action in a transfer case must actually be a transfer
(or denied transfer), which requires a change (or denied change) in
the compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment.
See Brief for District of Columbia et al. as Amici Curiae
17–18. There may be edge cases about what qualifies as a transfer.
But as the Solicitor General notes, a change in an employee’s job
location or job responsibilities readily qualifies. See Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 11, 22.


