::decision_cite:: 22-1008
::decision_name::  Corner Post, Inc. v. Board of Governors
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1008

															_________________

															CORNER POST, INC., PETITIONER v. BOARD
OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eighth circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Barrett delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															The default statute of limitations for suits
against the United States requires “the complaint [to be] filed
within six years after the right of action first accrues.” 28 U. S.
C. §2401(a). We must decide when a claim brought under the
Administrative Procedure Act “accrues” for purposes of this
provision. The answer is straightforward. A claim accrues when the
plaintiff has the right to assert it in court—and in the case of
the APA, that is when the plaintiff is injured by final agency
action.

															I

															Corner Post is a truckstop and convenience
store located in Watford City, North Dakota. It was incorporated in
2017, and in 2018, it opened for business. Like most merchants,
Corner Post accepts debit cards as a form of payment. While
convenient for customers, debit cards are costly for merchants:
Every transaction requires them to pay an “interchange fee” to the
bank that issued the card. The amount of the fee is set by the
payment networks, like Visa and Mastercard, that process the
transaction between the banks of merchants and cardholders. The
cost quickly adds up. Since it opened, Corner Post has paid
hundreds of thousands of dollars in interchange fees—which has
meant higher prices for its customers.

															Interchange fees have long been a sore point for
merchants. For many years, payment networks had free rein over the
fee amount—and because they used the promise of per-transaction
profit to compete for the banks’ business, they had significant
incentive to raise the fees. Merchants—who would lose customers if
they declined debit cards—had little choice but to pay whatever the
networks charged. Left unregulated, interchange fees ballooned.

															Congress eventually stepped in. The Durbin
Amendment to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act of 2010 tasks the Federal Reserve Board with setting
“standards for assessing whether the amount of any interchange
transaction fee . . . is reasonable and proportional to the cost
incurred by the issuer with respect to the transaction.” 124 Stat.
2068, 15 U. S. C. §1693o–2(a)(3)(A). Discharging this duty,
the Board promulgated Regulation II, which sets a maximum
interchange fee of $0.21 per transaction plus .05% of the
transaction’s value. See Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing,
76 Fed. Reg. 43394, 43420 (2011). The Board published the rule on
July 20, 2011.

															Four months later, a group of retail-industry
trade associations and individual retailers sued the Board, arguing
that Regulation II allows costs that the statute does not. See
NACS v. Board of Governors of FRS, 958 F. Supp. 2d
85, 95–96 (DC 2013). The District Court agreed, id., at
99–109, but the D. C. Circuit reversed, concluding “that the
Board’s rules generally rest on reasonable constructions of the
statute,” NACS v. Board of Governors of FRS, 746 F.3d
474, 477 (2014).

															Corner Post, of course, did not exist when the
Board adopted Regulation II or even during the D. C. Circuit
litigation. But after opening its doors, it too became frustrated
by interchange fees, and in 2021, joined a suit brought against the
Board under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The complaint
alleges that Regulation II is unlawful because it allows payment
networks to charge higher fees than the statute permits. See 5 U.
S. C. §§706(2)(A), (C).

															The District Court dismissed the suit as barred
by 28 U. S. C. §2401(a), the applicable statute of limitations,
2022 WL 909317, *7–*9 (ND, Mar. 11, 2022), and the Eighth Circuit
affirmed, North Dakota Retail Assn. v. Board of Governors
of FRS, 55 F. 4th 634 (2022). Following other Circuits, it
distinguished between “facial” challenges to a rule (like Corner
Post’s challenge to Regulation II) and challenges to a rule
“as-applied” to a particular party. Id., at 640–641. The
Eighth Circuit held that “when plaintiffs bring a facial challenge
to a final agency action, the right of action accrues, and the
limitations period begins to run, upon publication of the
regulation.” Id., at 641. On this view, §2401(a)’s 6-year
limitations period began in 2011, when the Board published
Regulation II, and expired in 2017, before Corner Post swiped its
first debit card. See id., at 643. Corner Post’s suit was
therefore too late.

															The Eighth Circuit’s decision deepened a circuit
split over when §2401(a)’s statute of limitations begins to run for
APA suits challenging agency action. At least six Circuits now hold
that the limitations period for “facial” APA challenges begins on
the date of final agency action—e.g., when the rule
was promulgated—regardless of when the plaintiff was injured. See,
e.g., id., at 641; Wind River Min.
Corp. v. United States, 946 F.2d 710, 715 (CA9 1991);
Dunn-McCampbell Royalty Interest, Inc. v. National Park
Serv., 
112 F.3d 1283, 1287 (CA5 1997); Harris v. FAA,

353 F.3d 1006, 1009–1010 (CADC 2004); Hire Order Ltd. v.
Marianos, 698 F.3d 168, 170 (CA4 2012); Odyssey Logistics
& Tech. Corp. v. Iancu, 959 F.3d 1104, 1111–1112 (CA
Fed. 2020). By contrast, the Sixth Circuit has stated a generally
applicable rule that §2401(a)’s limitations period begins when the
plaintiff is injured by agency action, even if that injury did not
occur until many years after the action became final. Herr
v. United States Forest Serv., 803 F.3d 809, 820–822 (2015)
(“When a party first becomes aggrieved by a regulation that exceeds
an agency’s statutory authority more than six years after the
regulation was promulgated, that party may challenge the regulation
without waiting for enforcement proceedings” (emphasis deleted)).
We granted certiorari to resolve the split. 600 U. S. ___
(2023).

															II

															Three statutory provisions control our
analysis: 5 U. S. C. §702 and §704, the relevant APA provisions,
and 28 U. S. C. §2401(a), the relevant statute of limitations. The
APA provisions grant Corner Post a cause of action subject to
certain conditions, and §2401(a) sets the window within which
Corner Post can assert its claim.

															Section 702 authorizes persons injured by agency
action to obtain judicial review by suing the United States or one
of its agencies, officers, or employees. See Abbott
Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S.
136, 140–141 (1967). It provides that “[a] person suffering
legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or
aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant
statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof.” 5 U. S. C. §702.
We have explained that §702 “requir[es] a litigant to show, at the
outset of the case, that he is injured in fact by agency action.”
Director, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs v.
Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 514 U.S.
122, 127 (1995). Thus, a litigant cannot bring an APA claim
unless and until she suffers an injury.[1]

															While §702 equips injured parties with a cause
of action, §704 limits the agency actions that are subject to
judicial review. Unless another statute makes the agency’s action
reviewable (and none does for Regulation II), judicial review is
available only for “final agency action.” §704. In most cases,
then, a plaintiff can only challenge an action that “mark[s] the
consummation of the agency’s decisionmaking process” and is “one by
which rights or obligations have been determined, or from which
legal consequences will flow.” Bennett v. Spear,
520 U.S.
154, 177–178 (1997) (internal quotation marks omitted). Note
that §702’s injury requirement and §704’s finality requirement work
hand in hand: Each is a “necessary, but not by itself . . .
sufficient, ground for stating a claim under the APA.” Herr,
803 F. 3d, at 819.

															The applicable statute of limitations, 28 U. S.
C. §2401(a), contains the language we must interpret: “[E]very
civil action commenced against the United States shall be barred
unless the complaint is filed within six years after the right
of action first accrues.” (Emphasis added.) This provision
applies generally to suits against the United States unless the
timing provision of a more specific statute displaces it. See,
e.g., 33 U. S. C. §1369(b) (deadline to challenge
certain agency actions under the Clean Water Act).

															The Board contends that an APA claim “accrues”
when agency action is “final” for purposes of §704—injury, it says,
is necessary for the suit but irrelevant to the statute of
limitations.[2] We disagree. A
right of action “accrues” when the plaintiff has a “complete and
present cause of action”—i.e., when she has the right
to “file suit and obtain relief.” Green v. Brennan,
578 U.S. 547, 554 (2016) (internal quotation marks omitted). An APA
plaintiff does not have a complete and present cause of action
until she suffers an injury from final agency action, so the
statute of limitations does not begin to run until she is
injured.

															III

															Congress enacted §2401(a) in 1948, two years
after it enacted the APA. See 62 Stat. 971. Section 2401(a)’s
predecessor was the statute-of-limitations provision for the Little
Tucker Act, which gave district courts jurisdiction over non-tort
monetary claims not exceeding $10,000 against the United States.
See §24, 36 Stat. 1093 (“That no suit against the Government of the
United States shall be allowed under this paragraph unless the same
shall have been brought within six years after the right accrued
for which the claim is made”); Brief for Professor Aditya Bamzai et
al. as Amici Curiae 5–6. When Congress revised and
recodified the Judicial Code in 1948, it converted the Little
Tucker Act’s statute of limitations into a general statute of
limitations for all suits against the Government—replacing “under
this paragraph” with “every civil action against the United
States.” But Congress continued to start the 6-year limitations
period when the right “accrues.” Compare 36 Stat. 1093 (“after the
right accrued for which the claim is made”) with §2401(a) (“after
the right of action first accrues”).

															In 1948, as now, “accrue” had a well-settled
meaning: A “right accrues when it comes into existence,” United
States v. Lindsay, 346 U.S.
568, 569 (1954)—i.e., “ ‘when the plaintiff has a
complete and present cause of action,’ ” Gabelli v.
SEC, 568 U.S.
442, 448 (2013) (quoting Wallace v. Kato,
549 U.S.
384, 388 (2007)). This definition has appeared “in dictionaries
from the 19th century up until today.” Gabelli, 568 U. S.,
at 448. Legal dictionaries in the 1940s and 1950s uniformly
explained that a cause of action “ ‘accrues’ when a suit may be
maintained thereon.” Black’s Law Dictionary 37 (4th ed. 1951)
(Black’s); see also, e.g., Ballentine’s Law Dictionary 15–16
(2d ed. 1948) (Ballentine’s) (“[A]ccrual of cause of action”
defined as the “coming or springing into existence of a right to
sue” (boldface deleted)). Thus, we have explained that a cause of
action “does not become ‘complete and present’ for limitations
purposes”—it does not accrue—“until the plaintiff can file
suit and obtain relief.” Bay Area Laundry and Dry Cleaning
Pension Trust Fund v. Ferbar Corp. of Cal., 522 U.S.
192, 201 (1997).

															Importantly, contemporaneous dictionaries also
explained that a cause of action accrues “on [the] date that damage
is sustained and not [the] date when causes are set in motion which
ultimately produce injury.” Black’s 37. “[I]f an act is not legally
injurious until certain consequences occur, it is not the mere
doing of the act that gives rise to a cause of action, but the
subsequent occurrence of damage or loss as the consequence of the
act, and in such case no cause of action accrues until the loss
or damage occurs.” Ballentine’s 16 (emphasis added). Thus, when
Congress used the phrase “right of action first accrues” in
§2401(a), it was well understood that a claim does not “accrue” as
soon as the defendant acts, but only after the plaintiff suffers
the injury required to press her claim in court.

															Our precedent treats this definition of accrual
as the “standard rule for limitations periods.” Green, 578
U. S., at 554. “We have repeatedly recognized that Congress
legislates against the ‘standard rule that the limitations period
commences when the plaintiff has a complete and present cause of
action.’ ” Graham County Soil & Water Conservation Dist.
v. United States ex rel. Wilson, 545
U.S. 409, 418 (2005) (quoting Bay Area Laundry, 522 U.
S., at 201). It is “unquestionably the traditional rule” that
“[a]bsent other indication, a statute of limitations begins to run
at the time the plaintiff ‘has the right to apply to the court for
relief.’ ” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U.S.
19, 37 (2001) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment) (quoting 1
H. Wood, Limitation of Actions §122a, p. 684 (rev. 4th ed. 1916)
(Wood)). Conversely, we have “reject[ed]” the possibility that a
“limitations period commences at a time when the [plaintiff] could
not yet file suit” as “inconsistent with basic limitations
principles.” Bay Area Laundry, 522 U. S., at 200.

															This traditional rule constitutes a strong
background presumption. While the “standard rule can be displaced
such that the limitations period begins to run before a plaintiff
can file a suit,” we “ ‘will not infer such an odd result in the
absence of any such indication’ in the text of the limitations
period.” Green, 578 U. S., at 554 (quoting Reiter v.
Cooper, 507 U.S.
258, 267 (1993)). “Unless Congress has told us otherwise in the
legislation at issue, a cause of action does not become ‘complete
and present’ for limitations purposes until the plaintiff can file
suit and obtain relief.” Bay Area Laundry, 522 U. S., at
201.

															There is good reason to conclude that Congress
codified the traditional accrual rule in §2401(a). Nothing “in the
text of [§2401(a)’s] limitations period” gives any indication that
it begins to run before the plaintiff has a complete and present
cause of action. Green, 578 U. S., at 554. Rather, §2401(a)
uses standard language that had a well-settled meaning in 1948:
“right of action first accrues.” Moreover, Congress knew how to
depart from the traditional rule to create a limitations period
that begins with the defendant’s action instead of the plaintiff ’s
injury: Just six years before it enacted §2401(a), Congress passed
the Emergency Price Control Act of 1942, which required challenges
to Office of Price Administration actions to be filed “[w]ithin a
period of sixty days after the issuance of any regulation or
order.” §203(a), 56 Stat. 31 (emphasis added); see also
Administrative Orders Review Act (Hobbs Act), §4, 64 Stat. 1130
(1950) (allowing petitions for review “within sixty days after
entry of ” a “final order reviewable under this Act”). Section
2401(a), by contrast, stuck with the standard accrual language.

															Section 2401(a) thus operates as a statute of
limitations rather than a statute of repose. “[A] statute of
limitations creates ‘a time limit for suing in a civil case, based
on the date when the claim accrued.’ ” CTS Corp. v.
Waldburger, 573 U.S.
1, 7–8 (2014) (quoting Black’s 1546 (9th ed. 2009)). That
describes §2401(a), with its reference to when the right of action
“accrues,” to a tee. “A statute of repose, on the other hand, puts
an outer limit on the right to bring a civil action” that is
“measured not from the date on which the claim accrues but instead
from the date of the last culpable act or omission of the
defendant.” 573 U. S., at 8. Such statutes bar “ ‘any suit that is
brought after a specified time since the defendant acted . . . even
if this period ends before the plaintiff has suffered a resulting
injury.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Black’s 1546). That describes
statutes like the Hobbs Act, which sets a filing deadline of 60
days from the “entry” of the agency order. 64 Stat. 1130. Statutes
of limitations “require plaintiffs to pursue diligent prosecution
of known claims”; statutes of repose reflect a “legislative
judgment that a defendant should be free from liability after the
legislatively determined period of time.” CTS Corp., 573 U.
S., at 8–9 (internal quotation marks omitted).[3] The Board asks us to interpret §2401(a) as a
defendant- protective statute of repose that begins to run when
agency action becomes final. But §2401(a)’s plaintiff-focused
language makes it an accrual-based statute of limitations.

															*  *  *

															Section 2401(a) embodies the plaintiff-centric
traditional rule that a statute of limitations begins to run only
when the plaintiff has a complete and present cause of action.
Because injury, not just finality, is required to sue under the
APA, Corner Post’s cause of action was not complete and present
until it was injured by Regulation II. Therefore, its suit is not
barred by the statute of limitations.

															IV

															The Board concedes that some claims accrue for
purposes of §2401(a) when the plaintiff has a complete and present
cause of action—in other words, it admits that “accrue” carries its
usual meaning for some claims. But it argues that facial challenges
to agency rules are different, accruing when agency action is final
rather than when the plaintiff can assert her claim. See also
post, at 5–6 (Jackson, J., dissenting). The Board raises
several arguments to support its position, but none work.

															A

															The Board puts the most weight on the many
specific statutory review provisions that start the clock at
finality. See also post, at 12–15 (Jackson, J., dissenting).
The Hobbs Act, for example, requires persons aggrieved by certain
final orders and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission, Secretary of Agriculture, and Secretary of
Transportation, among others, to petition for review “within 60
days after [the] entry” of the final agency action. 28 U. S. C.
§§2342, 2344; see also, e.g., 29 U. S. C. §655(f )
(suits challenging Occupational Safety and Health Administration
standards must be filed “prior to the sixtieth day after such
standard is promulgated”). The Board contends that such statutes
reflect a standard administrative-law practice of starting the
limitations period when “any proper plaintiff ” can challenge the
final agency action. Brief for Respondent 9. There is “no sound
basis,” it insists, “for instead applying a
challenger-by-challenger approach to calculate the limitations
period on APA claims.” Ibid.; see also post, at 9–10
(Jackson, J., dissenting).

															1

															This argument hits the immutable obstacle of
§2401(a)’s text. Unlike the specific review provisions that the
Board cites, §2401(a) does not refer to the date of the
agency action’s “entry” or “promulgat[ion]”; it says “right of
action first accrues.” That textual difference matters. To begin,
the latter language reflects a statute of limitations and the
former a statute of repose. Moreover, the specific review
provisions actually undercut the Board’s argument, because they
illustrate that Congress has sometimes employed the Board’s
preferred final-agency-action rule—but did not do so in §2401(a).
As we observed in Rotkiske v. Klemm, it is
“particularly inappropriate” to read language into a statute of
limitations “when, as here, Congress has shown that it knows how to
adopt the omitted language or provision.” 589 U.S. 8, 14
(2019).

															In arguing to the contrary, post, at
12–16, the dissent ignores the textual differences between §2401(a)
and finality-focused specific review provisions—flouting
Rotkiske’s admonition to heed such distinctions. According
to the dissent, we cannot expect “Congress to have explicitly
stated that accrual in §2401(a) starts at the point of final agency
action when §2401(a) is a residual provision” that applies
generally. Post, at 15. But §2401(a)’s text reflects a
choice: Congress took the Little Tucker Act’s plaintiff-focused
limitations period—which began when “the right accrued for which
the claim is made,” 36 Stat. 1093—and made it generally applicable
to “every” suit against the United States, §2401(a); see Part III,
supra. Congress could have created a separate residual
provision for suits challenging agency action and pegged its
limitations period to the moment of finality, using statutes like
the Emergency Price Control Act as a model. It chose a different
path.

															Undeterred, the dissent insists that by the time
§2401(a) was enacted, Congress had “uniformly expressed [a]
judgment” that the limitations period for agency suits should be
defendant-centric and start with finality. Post, at 14.
Again, this argument disregards §2401(a)’s text in favor of alleged
congressional intent divined from other statutes with very
different language. “As this Court has repeatedly stated, the text
of a law controls over purported legislative intentions unmoored
from any statutory text”; the Court “may not ‘replace the actual
text with speculation as to Congress’ intent.’ ” Oklahoma v.
Castro-Huerta, 597 U.S. 629, 642 (2022) (quoting
Magwood v. Patterson, 561 U.S.
320, 334 (2010)).

															In any event, the dissent misunderstands the
history. See post, at 14, and n. 6. (Notably, the Board
itself does not make this argument.) While the Emergency Price
Control Act of 1942 preceded the APA (1946) and §2401(a) (1948),
most finality-focused limitations provisions, like the Hobbs Act
(1950), came later. See post, at 12–13, and n. 5;
e.g., 5 U. S. C. §7703(b)(1) (added by 92 Stat. 1143
(1978)). To conjure its supposed backdrop, the dissent cites a
hodgepodge of other pre-1948 statutes that started the clock at
finality. Post, at 14, n. 6. But these statutes generally
governed challenges to orders adjudicating a party’s own
rights—what we today might call “as-applied” challenges. For
example, 7 U. S. C. §194(a) provided a 30-day limitations period
for a meatpacker to appeal an order finding that the packer “has
violated or is violating any provision” of the statute regulating
business practices in the meatpacking industry. 42 Stat. 161–162;
see also, e.g., 15 U. S. C. §45(c) (persons required
by a Federal Trade Commission order to cease a business practice
may obtain review of that order within 60 days). Statutes like
these do not contradict the plaintiff-centric standard accrual
rule, because a party subject to such an order suffers legally
cognizable injury at the same time that the order becomes
final.[4]

															Thus, even if the “intention” Congress
“expressed” in textually distinct statutes could overcome
§2401(a)’s language, post, at 14, the dissent’s history
would not support its supposed background presumption—that the
limitations period for facial challenges to regulations begins when
the rule becomes final even if the plaintiff does not yet have a
complete and present cause of action. Instead, the best course, as
always, is to stick with the ordinary meaning of the text that
actually applies, §2401(a). Given the settled, plaintiff-centric
meaning of “right of action first accrues” in 1948—not to mention
in the Little Tucker Act—the dissent cannot “displace” this
“standard rule” with scattered citations to different, inapposite
statutes. Green, 578 U. S., at 554.

															2

															The standard accrual rule that §2401(a)’s
limitations period exemplifies is plaintiff
specific—even if repose provisions like the Hobbs Act eschew
a “challenger-by- challenger” approach. Brief for Respondent 9. The
Board’s rule would start the limitations period applicable to the
plaintiff not when she had a complete and present cause of
action but when the agency action was final and, theoretically,
some other plaintiff was injured and could have sued. But
§2401(a)’s text focuses on a specific plaintiff: “the
complaint is filed within six years after the right of
action first accrues.” (Emphasis added.)

															The dissent disputes §2401(a)’s plaintiff
specificity by pointing out that it does not say “the plaintiff
’s right of action first accrues.” Post, at 9. True, but
it does use the definite article “the” to link “the
complaint” with “the right of action.” So the most natural
interpretation is that its limitations period begins when the
cause of action associated with the complaint—the plaintiff ’s
cause of action—is complete. And while the dissent cites dictionary
definitions of “accrue” that mention “ ‘a right to sue,’ ”
ibid., the statute’s use of the definite article “the” takes
precedence. The Board and the dissent read §2401(a) as if it says
“the complaint is filed within six years after a right of
action [i.e., anyone’s right of action] first
accrues”—which, of course, it does not.

															In fact, we have explained that the traditional
accrual rule looks to when “the plaintiff ”—this particular
plaintiff—“has a complete and present cause of action.”
Green, 578 U. S., at 554 (internal quotation marks omitted;
emphasis added). No precedent suggests that the traditional rule
contemplates the Board’s hypothetical “when could someone else have
sued” sort of inquiry.[5]
Rather, the “statute of limitations begins to run at the time
the plaintiff has the right to apply to the court for
relief.” TRW Inc., 534 U. S., at 37 (opinion of Scalia, J.)
(internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added).[6]

															Importing the Board’s special administrative-law
rule into §2401(a) would create a defendant-focused rule for agency
suits while retaining the traditional challenger- specific accrual
rule for other suits against the United States. That would give the
same statutory text—“right of action first accrues”—different
meanings in different contexts, even though those words had a
single, well-settled meaning when Congress enacted §2401(a). See
Part III, supra. The Board’s interpretation would thereby
decouple the statute of limitations from any injury “such that the
limitations period begins to run before a plaintiff can file a
suit”—for some, but not all, suits governed by
§2401(a). Green, 578 U. S., at 554. We “will not infer such
an odd result in the absence of any such indication in the text of
the limitations period.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks
omitted).

															B

															Turning to §2401(a)’s text, the Board draws
significance from this sentence: “The action of any person under
legal disability or beyond the seas at the time the claim accrues
may be commenced within three years after the disability ceases.”
This language, the Board stresses, “necessarily reflects Congress’s
understanding that a claim can ‘accrue[ ]’ for purposes of Section
2401(a)” even when a person is unable to sue. Brief for Respondent
24. True enough. It is a mystery, however, why the Board finds this
helpful. The tolling exception applies when the plaintiff
had a complete and present cause of action after he was
injured but his legal disability or absence from the country
“prevent[ed] him from bringing a timely suit.” Goewey v.
United States, 222 Ct. Cl. 104, 113, 612 F.2d 539, 544
(1979) (per curiam). What matters for accrual is when the
plaintiff had “the right to apply to the court for relief,”
not whether some external impediment prevented her from doing so.
Wood §122a, at 684 (emphasis added). The exception, therefore,
sheds no light on when the clock started ticking for Corner
Post—but it does show Congress’s concern for plaintiffs who might
lose a cause of action through no fault of their own.

															C

															The Board also leans on our precedent—namely,
Reading Co. v. Koons, 271 U.S.
58 (1926), and Crown Coat Front Co. v. United
States, 386 U.S.
503 (1967)—to support its unusual interpretation of “accrual.”
See also post, at 6–9 (Jackson, J., dissenting). Again, the
Board comes up empty.

															In Koons, we interpreted the statute of
limitations under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act, which
barred actions brought more than two years after “ ‘the cause of
action accrued.’ ” 271 U. S., at 60 (quoting ch. 149, §6, 35 Stat.
66). We held that the plaintiff ’s wrongful-death claim accrued
when the employee died, even though the estate’s administrator was
not appointed until later and the administrator was “the only
person authorized by the statute to maintain the action.” 271 U.
S., at 60. The Board interprets Koons to hold that a claim
accrued at a time when no plaintiff could sue. Thus, the Board
reasons, it is consistent with the meaning of “accrue” to say that
Corner Post’s claim “accrued” before it could sue.

															The Board’s characterization of Koons is
incomplete. Koons explained that the administrator “acts
only for the benefit of persons specifically designated in the
statute,” and at the “time of death there are identified persons
for whose benefit the liability exists and who can start the
machinery of the law in motion to enforce it, by applying for the
appointment of an administrator.” Id., at 62. If a
beneficiary sued in her individual capacity immediately after the
employee’s death, she could amend her suit to describe herself as
“executor or administrator of the decedent.” Ibid. So “at
the death of decedent, there are real parties in interest who may
procure the action to be brought.” Id., at 62–63. While it
is true that the claim accrued before any particular administrator
was appointed, the beneficiaries on whose behalf any administrator
would seek relief—the “real parties in interest”—had the right to
“procure the action” after the employee died. Given this unique
context, Koons does not contradict the proposition that a
claim generally accrues when the plaintiff has a complete and
present cause of action.

															Nor does Crown Coat. That case concerned
a contract dispute in which a Government contractor sought an
equitable adjustment to the payment it received. 386 U. S., at 507.
The contract required the contractor to present its claim to the
contracting officer and Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals;
its claim was “not subject to adjudication in the courts” until it
was denied by the Board. Id., at 511. The question presented
was whether §2401(a)’s statute of limitations began to run when the
Board issued its final determination or at an earlier date.
Id., at 507.

															We held that the right of action first accrued
when the Board denied the contractor’s claim, because the
contractor had “the right to resort to the courts only upon the
making of that administrative determination.” Id., at 512.
We explained that §2401(a)’s phrase “right of action” refers to
“the right to file a civil action in the courts against the United
States.” Id., at 511. Given the contract’s
administrative-exhaustion requirement, “the contractor’s claim was
subject only to administrative, not judicial, determination in the
first instance”; the plaintiff was “not legally entitled to ask the
courts to adjudicate [its] claim as an original matter.”
Id., at 511–512, 515. So its “claim or right to bring a
civil action against the United States” did not “matur[e]” until
the Board made its final decision. Id., at 514. Crown
Coat thus supports Corner Post: The Court interpreted §2401(a)
to embody the traditional rule that a claim accrues when the
plaintiff has the right to bring suit in court.

															Notwithstanding Crown Coat’s holding, the
Board and the dissent try to marshal support from its dicta. The
Court noted that it is hazardous “to define for all purposes when a
‘cause of action’ first ‘accrues’ ”; it cautioned that those words
should be “ ‘interpreted in the light of the general purposes of
the statute and of its other provisions’ ” and the “ ‘practical
ends’ ” served by time limitations. Id., at 517 (quoting
Koons, 271 U. S., at 62). Seizing on this language, the
Board insists that the word “accrues” is a chameleon, taking on
different meanings in different contexts—and in the
administrative-law context, a right of action “accrues” when a
regulation is final, full stop. See also post, at 6
(Jackson, J., dissenting) (citing Crown Coat for the
proposition that “the word ‘accrues’ lacks any fixed meaning”).

															The Board and the dissent vastly overread—in
fact, they misread—Crown Coat. The Court did not suggest
that the same words “right of action first accrues” in a single
statute should mean different things in different
contexts—which is how the Board and the dissent would have us
interpret §2401(a). Rather, the Court made its observation in the
course of distinguishing §2401(a) from a statutory scheme that
departed from the traditional accrual rule.[7] 386 U. S., at 516–517. Moreover, as we have already
explained, the Court interpreted §2401(a)—the very statute at issue
in this case—to start the clock when the plaintiff is “legally
entitled” to file suit. Id., at 515. It also specifically
rejected the Government’s position that the time can run even
before a plaintiff ’s “civil action against the United States
matures.” Id., at 514; see also ibid. (noting that
the Government’s position “would have unfortunate impact”). We
therefore do not read Crown Coat’s “general purposes”
language to contradict either its holding or the “ ‘standard rule’
for limitations periods.” Green, 578 U. S., at 554.

															Even if Crown Coat’s dicta supported
sapping “accrues” of any “fixed meaning,” post, at 6
(Jackson, J., dissenting), this approach has been contravened by
the weight of subsequent precedent. Our limitations cases from the
last several decades have instead emphasized the strength of the
traditional, plaintiff-centric accrual rule and demanded that
departures be justified by the statutory “text of the limitations
period.” Green, 578 U. S., at 554; see also,
e.g., Graham County, 545 U. S., at 418–419
(explaining that in Reiter v. Cooper, 507 U. S., at
267, the Court “declin[ed] to countenance the ‘odd result’ that a
federal cause of action and statute of limitations arise at
different times ‘absen[t] . . . any such indication in the statute’
”); Bay Area Laundry, 522 U. S., at 201.

															D

															Finally, the Board raises policy concerns. It
emphasizes that agencies and regulated parties need the finality of
a 6-year cutoff. After that point, facial challenges impose
significant burdens on agencies and courts. Moreover, if they are
successful, such challenges upset the reliance interests of the
agencies and regulated parties that have long operated under
existing rules. See also post, at 18–24 (Jackson, J.,
dissenting).

															“[P]leas of administrative inconvenience . . .
never ‘justify departing from the statute’s clear text.’ ”
Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U.S. 155, 169 (2021)
(quoting Pereira v. Sessions, 585 U. S 198, 217
(2018)). Congress could have chosen different language in §2401(a)
or created a general statute of repose for agencies. It did
not.

															That is enough to dispatch the Board’s policy
arguments, but we add that its concerns are overstated. Put aside
facial challenges like Corner Post’s. Regulated parties “may always
assail a regulation as exceeding the agency’s statutory authority
in enforcement proceedings against them” or “petition an agency to
reconsider a longstanding rule and then appeal the denial of that
petition.” Herr, 803 F. 3d, at 821–822. So even on the
Board’s preferred interpretation, “[a] federal regulation that
makes it six years without being contested does not enter a
promised land free from legal challenge.” Id., at 821.
Likewise, the dissent imagines an alternative reality of total
finality that simply does not exist. See post, at 21–23.

															Moreover, the opportunity to challenge agency
action does not mean that new plaintiffs will always win or that
courts and agencies will need to expend significant resources to
address each new suit. Given that major regulations are typically
challenged immediately, courts entertaining later challenges often
will be able to rely on binding Supreme Court or circuit precedent.
If neither this Court nor the relevant court of appeals has weighed
in, a court may be able to look to other circuits for persuasive
authority. And if no other authority upholding the agency action is
persuasive, the court may have more work to do, but there is all
the more reason for it to consider the merits of the newcomer’s
challenge.[8]

															Turning to the other side of the policy ledger,
the Board slights the arguments supporting the plaintiff-centric
accrual rule. In addition to being compelled by §2401(a)’s text,
this rule vindicates the APA’s “basic presumption” that anyone
injured by agency action should have access to judicial review.
Abbott Labs., 387 U. S., at 140. It also respects our
“deep-rooted historic tradition that everyone

															should have his own day in court.”
Richards v. Jefferson County, 517
U.S. 793, 798 (1996) (internal quotation marks omitted). Under
the Board’s finality rule, only those fortunate enough to suffer an
injury within six years of a rule’s promulgation may bring an APA
suit. Everyone else—no matter how serious the injury or how illegal
the rule—has no recourse.[9]

															The dissent also raises a host of policy
arguments masquerading as “matter[s] of congressional intent.”
Post, at 18–24. And it warns that today’s opinion will
“devastate the functioning of the Federal Government.” Post,
at 23. This claim is baffling—indeed, bizarre—in a case about a
statute of limitations. The Solicitor General, whose mandate is to
protect the interests of the Federal Government, comes nowhere
close to suggesting that a plaintiff-centric interpretation of
§2401(a) spells the end of the United States as we know it. Perhaps
the dissent believes that the Code of Federal Regulations is full
of substantively illegal regulations vulnerable to meritorious
challenges; or perhaps it believes that meritless challenges will
flood federal courts that are too incompetent to reject them. We
have more confidence in both the Executive Branch and the
Judiciary. But we do agree with the dissent on one point: “ ‘[T]he
ball is in Congress’ court.’ ” Post, at 24 (quoting
Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.,
550 U.S.
618, 661 (2007) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting)). Section 2401(a) is
75 years old. If it is a poor fit for modern APA litigation, the
solution is for Congress to enact a distinct statute of limitations
for the APA.

															*  *  *

															An APA claim does not accrue for purposes of
§2401(a)’s 6-year statute of limitations until the plaintiff is
injured by final agency action. Because Corner Post filed suit
within six years of its injury, §2401(a) did not bar its challenge
to Regulation II. We reverse the Eighth Circuit’s judgment to the
contrary and remand the case for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
The dissent asserts that §702
“restricts who may challenge agency action,” yet its injury
requirement “says nothing about” the cause of action or elements of
the claim. Post, at 16. But surely the dissent does not mean
to suggest that an uninjured person may bring an APA claim.
Whether one calls injury a restriction on who may sue or an element
of the cause of action, the relevant, undisputed point is that a
plaintiff cannot sue under the APA unless she is “injured in fact
by agency action.” Newport News, 514 U. S., at
127.
2
The Board leaves open the
possibility that someone could bring an as-applied challenge to a
rule when the agency relies on that rule in enforcement proceedings
against that person, even if more than six years have passed since
the rule’s promulgation. But Corner Post, as a merchant rather than
a payment network, is not regulated by Regulation II—so it will
never be the target of an enforcement action in which it could
challenge that rule. Justice Kavanaugh asserts that “Corner Post
can obtain relief in this case only because the APA authorizes
vacatur of agency rules.” Post, at 1 (concurring opinion).
Whether the APA authorizes vacatur has been subject to thoughtful
debate by Members of this Court. See, e.g., United
States v. Texas, 599 U.S. 670, 693–702 (2023) (Gorsuch,
J., concurring in judgment). We took this case only to decide how
§2401(a)’s statute of limitations applies to APA claims. We
therefore assume without deciding that vacatur is available under
the APA.
3
Perplexingly, the dissent
rejects this distinction, post, at 10–11, even though our
precedent clearly recognizes it: CTS Corp. acknowledged the
“substantial overlap between the policies of the two types of
statute” but concluded nonetheless that “each has a distinct
purpose and each is targeted at a different actor.” 573 U. S., at
8.
4
There is another reason to
doubt the dissent’s supposed background limitations principle for
facial challenges to agency rules: In the 1940s, “most
administrative activity was adjudicative in nature”; agencies
“rarely, if ever, adopted sweeping regulations.” K. Hickman &
R. Pierce, 1 Administrative Law §1.3, p. 26 (7th ed. 2024). The
dissent errs by extrapolating a general congressional intent that
all agency suits be subject to a finality-based limitations rule
based on pre-1948 statutes that governed a subset of agency
actions—adjudicative orders—and were enacted before facial
challenges to regulations became common. It is hard to see how
provisions governing when a party may challenge an order
adjudicating her own rights could set any kind of background rule
for facial APA challenges to generally applicable
regulations.
5
While the dissent attempts to
cabin our precedent describing the plaintiff-specific standard
accrual rule, nothing in those cases suggests that the rule is only
plaintiff-specific for “plaintiff-specific causes of action.”
Post, at 10; see, e.g., Gabelli v.
SEC, 568 U.S.
442, 448 (2013) (The “ ‘standard rule’ ” that a “claim accrues
‘when the plaintiff has a complete and present cause of action’ ”
has “governed since the 1830s” and “appears in dictionaries from
the 19th century up until today”). And regardless, the dissent’s
assertion that “administrative-law claims” are not
“plaintiff specific,” post, at 6, is mystifying given that
an APA plaintiff cannot sue until she suffers an injury, see
5 U. S. C. §702; n. 1, supra. By emphasizing the
plaintiff-agnostic aspects of facial challenges to agency action,
post, at 10, 16–18, the dissent conflates the
defendant-focused substance of an APA claim with its
plaintiff-specific cause of action.
6
Moreover, there may be cases
where no one is injured and able to sue at the time of final
agency action—e.g., if the agency delays a rule’s
enforcement—but the Board would still start the clock then. Cf.
Toilet Goods Assn., Inc. v. Gardner, 387 U.S.
158, 162–166 (1967) (agency rule was final but challenge was
not yet ripe). So the Board’s position cannot be reconciled even
with a challenger-agnostic form of the traditional accrual rule,
which at least would require that someone have a complete
and present cause of action before the limitations period
begins.
7
The Court distinguished the
limitations scheme at issue in McMahon v. United
States, 342 U.S.
25 (1951). That scheme involved two statutes: one requiring
“actions to be brought within two years after ‘the cause of action
arises’ ” and another “permit[ting] court action only if the claim
ha[d] been administratively disallowed, but set[ting] no time
within which a claim must be presented to the administrative body.”
Crown Coat, 386 U. S., at 516–517. The McMahon Court
held that the claim accrued not after the administrative
disallowance that would enable the plaintiff to sue in court, but
at the time of the plaintiff ’s earlier injury. 342 U. S., at 27.
Crown Coat attributed this holding to the unique two-statute
context: “[P]ostpon[ing] the usual time of accrual of the cause of
action [i.e., the time of injury] until the date of
disallowance” would have “permit[ted] the claimant to postpone
indefinitely the commencement of the running of the statutory
period.” 386 U. S., at 517; see McMahon, 342 U. S., at
27.
8
It also may be that some
injuries can only be suffered by entities that existed at the time
of the challenged action. Corner Post suggests that only parties
that existed during the rulemaking process can claim to have been
injured by a “procedural” shortcoming, like a deficient notice of
proposed rulemaking. Reply Brief 18–19. We need not resolve that
issue here because there is no dispute that Corner Post proffered
an injury that does not depend on its having existed when the Board
promulgated Regulation II: the rule’s alleged conflict with the
Durbin Amendment. The dissent’s observation that “the claims in
this case are procedural,” post, at 18, is confused.
Even if some of Corner Post’s claims might be procedural, its
central claim—that the regulation violates the statute—is a
prototypical substantive challenge.
9
Corner Post has no other way to
obtain meaningful review of Regulation II. Because Regulation II
does not directly regulate it, it will never be subject to
enforcement actions in which it may challenge the rule’s legality.
See n. 2, supra. Nor is the ability to petition the Board
for rulemaking to change Regulation II a sufficient substitute for
de novo judicial review of its lawfulness: The agency’s
“discretionary decision to decline to take new action” would be
subject only to “deferential judicial review.” PDR Network,
LLC v. Carlton & Harris Chiropractic, Inc., 588 U.S.
1, 25 (2019) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in judgment).


