::decision_cite:: 22-1078
::decision_name::  Warner Chappell Music, Inc. v. Nealy
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1078

															_________________

															WARNER CHAPPELL MUSIC, INC., et al.,
PETITIONERS v. SHERMAN NEALY, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eleventh circuit

															[May 9, 2024]

															Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															The Copyright Act’s statute of limitations
provides that a copyright owner must bring an infringement claim
within three years of its accrual. See 17 U. S. C.
§507(b). In this case, we assume without deciding that a claim is
timely under that provision if brought within three years of when
the plaintiff discovered an infringement, no matter when the
infringement happened. We then consider whether a claim satisfying
that rule is subject to another time-based limit—this one,
preventing the recovery of damages for any infringement that
occurred more than three years before a lawsuit’s filing. We hold
that no such limit on damages exists. The Copyright Act entitles a
copyright owner to recover damages for any timely claim.

															I

															This dispute had its start in a decades-old,
short-lived music venture. In 1983, Sherman Nealy and Tony Butler
formed Music Specialist, Inc. That company recorded and released
one album and several singles, including the works at issue. But
the collaboration dissolved a few years later. And Nealy soon
afterward went to prison for drug-related offenses. He served one
prison term from 1989 to 2008, and another from 2012 to 2015.

															Meanwhile, Butler (unbeknownst to Nealy) entered
into an agreement with Warner Chappell Music, Inc. to license works
from the Music Specialist catalog. And Warner Chappell found quite
a few takers. One Music Specialist work (“Jam the Box”) was
interpolated into Flo Rida’s hit song “In the Ayer,” which sold
millions of copies and reached No. 9 on the Billboard chart. Use of
that song was in turn licensed to several popular television shows,
including “So You Think You Can Dance.” Other Music Specialist
songs found their way into recordings by the Black Eyed Peas and
Kid Sister.

															In 2018, following his second prison stint,
Nealy sued Warner Chappell for copyright infringement. Nealy
alleged that he held the copyrights to Music Specialist’s songs and
that Warner Chappell’s licensing activities infringed his rights.
The infringing activity, Nealy claimed, dated back to 2008—so ten
years before he brought suit. Nealy sought damages and profits for
the alleged misconduct, as the Copyright Act authorizes. See
§504.

															For his claims to proceed, Nealy had to show
they were timely. Under the Copyright Act, a plaintiff must file
suit “within three years after the claim accrued.” §507(b). On one
understanding of that limitations provision, a copyright claim
“accrue[s]” when “an infringing act occurs.” Petrella v.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc., 572 U.S.
663, 670 (2014). So a plaintiff can complain about
infringements going back only three years from the time he filed
suit. If that rule governed, many of Nealy’s claims would be
untimely, because they alleged infringements occurring as much as
ten years earlier. But under an alternative view of the Act’s
limitations provision, a claim accrues when “the plaintiff
discovers, or with due diligence should have discovered,” the
infringing act. Ibid., n. 4. That so-called discovery
rule, used in the Circuit where Nealy sued, enables a diligent
plaintiff to raise claims about even very old infringements if he
discovered them within the prior three years. Nealy urged that all
his claims were timely under that rule because he did not learn of
Warner Chappell’s infringing conduct until 2016—just after he got
out of prison and less than three years before he sued.

															In the District Court, though, Nealy ran into a
different timing objection, related not to his ability to bring
suit but to his recovery of damages. Warner Chappell accepted that
the discovery rule governed the timeliness of Nealy’s claims. But
it argued that even if Nealy could sue under that rule for
infringements going back ten years, he could recover damages or
profits for only those occurring in the last three. The District
Court agreed. Relying on a decision from the Second Circuit, the
court held that even when claims for old infringements are timely,
monetary relief is “limited” to “the three years prior to the
filing” of the action. App. to Pet. for Cert. 26a (citing
Sohm v. Scholastic Inc., 959 F.3d 39, 51–52 (CA2
2020)). So Nealy could bring claims for infringing acts beyond that
three-year period, but could not recover any money for them.
Appreciating the impact of that ruling, the District Court
certified it for interlocutory appeal. See App. to Pet. for Cert.
36a; 28 U. S. C. §1292(b).

															The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
reversed, rejecting the notion of a three-year damages bar on a
timely claim. The court “assume[d] for the purposes of answering”
the certified question that all of Nealy’s claims were “timely
under the discovery rule.” 60 F. 4th 1325, 1331 (2023). And on
that assumption, the court ruled, he could recover full damages.
Allying itself with the Ninth rather than the Second Circuit, the
court held that a plaintiff with a timely claim under the discovery
rule may obtain “retrospective relief for [an] infringement” even
if it “occurr[ed] more than three years before the lawsuit’s
filing.” Ibid. (citing Starz Entertainment v.
MGM, 39 F. 4th 1236, 1244 (CA9 2022)). “[T]he plain
text of the Copyright Act,” the Eleventh Circuit stated, “does not
support the existence of a separate damages bar for an otherwise
timely copyright claim.” 60 F. 4th, at 1334. And imposing such
a bar, the court reasoned, “would gut the discovery rule by
eliminating any meaningful relief ” for the very claims it is
designed to preserve. Ibid.

															We granted certiorari, 600 U. S. ___
(2023), to resolve the Circuit split noted above, and we now affirm
the Eleventh Circuit’s decision.

															II

															The question on which this Court granted
certiorari is “[w]hether, under the discovery accrual rule applied
by the circuit courts,” a copyright plaintiff “can recover damages
for acts that allegedly occurred more than three years before the
filing of a lawsuit.” Ibid. That question, which the Court
substituted for Warner Chappell’s, incorporates an assumption: that
the discovery rule governs the timeliness of copyright claims. We
have never decided whether that assumption is valid—i.e.,
whether a copyright claim accrues when a plaintiff discovers or
should have discovered an infringement, rather than when the
infringement happened. See Petrella, 572 U. S., at 670,
n. 4. But that issue is not properly presented here, because
Warner Chappell never challenged the Eleventh Circuit’s use of the
discovery rule below. See supra, at 3; cf. Cutter v.
Wilkinson, 544 U.S.
709, 718, n. 7 (2005) (“[W]e are a court of review, not of
first view”). And as noted above, a division exists among the many
Courts of Appeals applying a copyright discovery rule (11 at last
count) about whether to superimpose a three-year limit on damages.
See supra, at 3–4; Petrella, 572 U. S., at 670,
n. 4; Pet. for Cert. 4. We therefore confined our review to
that disputed remedial issue, excluding consideration of the
discovery rule and asking only whether a plaintiff with a timely
claim under the rule can get damages going back more than three
years.[1]

															The text of the Copyright Act answers that
question in favor of copyright plaintiffs. The Act’s statute of
limitations provides in full: “No civil action shall be maintained
under the provisions of this title unless it is commenced within
three years after the claim accrued.” §507(b); see supra, at
2. That provision establishes a three-year period for filing suit,
beginning to run when a claim accrues—here, we assume, upon its
discovery. And that clock is a singular one. The “time-to-sue
prescription,” as we have called it, establishes no separate
three-year period for recovering damages, this one running from the
date of infringement. Petrella, 572 U. S., at 686. If
any time limit on damages exists, it must come from the Act’s
remedial sections. But those provisions likewise do not aid a
long-ago infringer. They state without qualification that an
infringer is liable either for statutory damages or for the owner’s
actual damages and the infringer’s profits. See §504(a)–(c). There
is no time limit on monetary recovery. So a copyright owner
possessing a timely claim for infringement is entitled to damages,
no matter when the infringement occurred.

															The Second Circuit’s contrary view, on top of
having no textual support, is essentially self-defeating. With one
hand, that court recognizes a discovery rule, thus enabling some
copyright owners to sue for infringing acts occurring more than
three years earlier. And with the other hand, the court takes away
the value in what it has conferred, by preventing the recovery of
damages for those older infringements. As the court below noted,
the three-year damages bar thus “gut[s]” or “silently eliminate[s]”
the discovery rule. 60 F. 4th, at 1333–1334; see supra,
at 4. Or said another way, the damages bar makes the discovery rule
functionally equivalent to its opposite number—an accrual rule
based on the timing of an infringement.[2] As noted above, we do not resolve today which of those
two rules should govern a copyright claim’s timeliness. See
supra, at 4. But we reject applying a judicially invented
damages limit to convert one of them into the other.

															And we have never before proposed that course.
The Second Circuit thought otherwise, relying on language in our
Petrella decision to support a three-year damages cap.
Sohm, 959 F. 3d, at 51–52. There we noted, as the
Second Circuit emphasized, that the Copyright Act’s statute of
limitations allows plaintiffs “to gain retrospective relief running
only three years back from” the filing of a suit. 572 U. S.,
at 672; see id., at 677. Taken out of context, that line
might seem to address the issue here. But in making that statement,
we merely described how the limitations provision works when a
plaintiff has no timely claims for infringing acts more than three
years old. That was the situation in Petrella. Because the
plaintiff had long known of the defendant’s infringing conduct, she
could not avail herself of the discovery rule. Rather, she sued
only for infringements that occurred in the three years before her
suit. The defendant argued that she could not recover for even that
much under the doctrine of laches, which protects against
unreasonable delay in filing suit. We rejected that doctrine’s
application, explaining that the Act’s limitations provision
already “takes account of delay” by—here is the language
again—allowing the plaintiff “to gain retrospective relief running
only three years back from” her suit’s filing. Id., at 672,
677. But we did not go beyond the case’s facts to say that even if
the limitations provision allows a claim for an earlier
infringement, the plaintiff may not obtain monetary relief. To the
contrary: The plaintiff in Petrella could get damages
“running only three years back” from filing because she could sue
for infringements occurring only within that timeframe.

															Nealy is in a different situation. He has
invoked the discovery rule to bring claims for infringing acts
occurring more than three years before he filed suit. And as we
have explained, we took this case on the assumption that such
claims may be timely under the Act’s limitations provision. See
supra, at 4. If Nealy’s claims are thus timely, he may
obtain damages for them. The Copyright Act contains no separate
time-based limit on monetary recovery.

															Accordingly, we affirm the judgment below.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 Disregarding the limit in
the reformulated question, Warner Chappell’s briefing in this Court
focuses almost entirely on the discovery rule itself. Compare Brief
for Petitioners 15–41 and Reply Brief 1–18 (disputing the discovery
rule), with Brief for Petitioners 41–44 and Reply Brief 19–21
(assuming the discovery rule’s existence). That choice is
especially surprising given that Warner Chappell’s own petition for
certiorari raised the broader discovery-rule issue only in a
footnote, which acknowledged that the issue was not raised below
and is not the subject of a Circuit split. See Pet. for Cert. 14,
n. But even supposing Warner Chappell’s petition had urged us to
opine on the discovery rule, our reformulation of the question
presented should have put an end to such arguments. “The Court
decides which questions to consider through well-established
procedures; allowing the able counsel who argue before us to alter
these questions or to devise additional questions at the last
minute would thwart this system.” Taylor v. Freeland
& Kronz, 503 U.S.
638, 646 (1992).
2
 Scholars have speculated
about “exceptional case[s]” in which a copy-right plaintiff could
get some benefit out of a discovery rule even when combined with a
three-year damages bar. 3 M. Nimmer & D. Nimmer, Copyright
§12.05[B][2][c][ii] (2023). Suffice to say that assuming those
cases exist at all, they are as rare as hen’s teeth.


