::decision_cite:: 22-1074
::decision_name::  Sheetz v. El Dorado County
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–1074

															_________________

															GEORGE SHEETZ, PETITIONER v. COUNTY OF
EL DORADO, CALIFORNIA

															on writ of certiorari to the court of appeal
of california, third appellate district

															[April 12, 2024]

															

															Justice Gorsuch, concurring.

															George Sheetz sued El Dorado County, alleging
that the county’s actions violated the Takings Clause under the
test this Court set forth in Nollan v. California Coastal
Comm’n, 483 U.S.
825 (1987), and Dolan v. City of Tigard,
512 U.S.
374 (1994). State courts dismissed Mr. Sheetz’s suit, holding
that the Nollan/Dolan test applies only in challenges to
administrative, not legislative, actions. Today, the county
essentially confesses error, and the Court corrects the state
courts’ mistake. It does so because our Constitution deals in
substance, not form. However the government chooses to act, whether
by way of regulation “ ‘or statute, or ordinance, or
miscellaneous decree,’ ” it must follow the same
constitutional rules. Ante, at 9 (quoting Cedar Point
Nursery v. Hassid, 594 U.S. 139, 149 (2021)).

															The Court notes but does not address a separate
question: whether the Nollan/Dolan test operates differently
when an alleged taking affects a “class of properties” rather than
“a particular development.” Ante, at 11. But how could it?
To assess whether a government has engaged in a taking by imposing
a condition on the development of land, the Nollan/Dolan
test asks whether the condition in question bears an
“ ‘essential nexus’ ” to the government’s land-use
interest and has “ ‘rough proportionality’ ” to a
property’s impact on that interest. Ante, at 6. Nothing
about that test depends on whether the government imposes the
challenged condition on a large class of properties or a single
tract or something in between. Once more, how the government acts
may vary but the Constitution’s standard for assessing those
actions does not.

															Our precedents confirm as much. In
Nollan, the California Coastal Commission told the
plaintiffs that they could build a home on their land only if they
accepted an easement allowing public access across their property
along the beach. The plaintiffs argued that the commission’s demand
amounted to a taking without just compensation, and the Court
agreed. In doing so, the Court acknowledged that the commission
hadn’t singled out the plaintiffs’ particular property for special
treatment but “had similarly conditioned” dozens of other building
projects. 483 U. S., at 829. It acknowledged, too, that the
commission’s demand of the plaintiffs came about only because of a
“ ‘comprehensive program’ ” demanding similar public
access easements up and down the California coast. Id., at
841. But none of that made any difference in the Court’s analysis,
the test it applied, or the conclusion it reached. All that
mattered was whether the government’s action amounted to an
uncompensated taking of the property of the plaintiffs whose case
was actually before the Court. Id., at 838.

															In Dolan, the Court faced a similar
situation and reached a similar conclusion. There, an Oregon
municipality conditioned a building permit on the plaintiff ’s
agreement to dedicate part of her land to “flood control and
traffic improvements.” 512 U. S., at 377. No one suggested
that the city had targeted the plaintiff ’s development for
special treatment; everyone agreed that the city’s challenged
action was the result of a “comprehensive land use pla[n],” one
developed to meet “statewide planning goals.” Ibid. Even so,
the Court held an “individualized determination” necessary to
determine whether an unconstitutional taking had occurred under the
same test the Court applied in Nollan. 512 U. S., at
393.

															The logic of today’s decision is entirely
consistent with these conclusions. The Takings Clause, the Court
stresses, is no “ ‘poor relation’ to other constitutional
rights.” Ante, at 10 (quoting Dolan, 512 U. S.,
at 392). And the government rarely mitigates a constitutional
problem by multiplying it. A governmentally imposed condition on
the freedom of speech, the right to assemble, or the right to
confront one’s accuser, for example, is no more permissible when
enforced against a large “class” of persons than it is when
enforced against a “particular” group. If takings claims must
receive “like treatment,” ante, at 10, whether the
government owes just compensation for taking your property cannot
depend on whether it has taken your neighbors’ property too.

															In short, nothing in Nollan,
Dolan, or today’s decision supports distinguishing between
government actions against the many and the few any more than it
supports distinguishing between legislative and administrative
actions. In all these settings, the same constitutional rules
apply. With that understanding, I am pleased to join the Court’s
opinion.

													
