::decision_cite:: 22-277
::decision_name::  Moody v. NetChoice, LLC
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 22–277 and 22–555

															_________________

															ASHLEY MOODY, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
FLORIDA, et al., PETITIONERS

															22–277v.

															NETCHOICE, LLC, dba NETCHOICE, et
al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eleventh circuit

															

															NETCHOICE, LLC, dba NETCHOICE, et al.,
PETITIONERS

															22–555v.

															KEN PAXTON, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
TEXAS

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, concurring in the
judgment.

															I agree with the Court’s decision to vacate and
remand because NetChoice and the Computer and Communications
Industry Association (together, the trade associations) have not
established that Texas’s H. B. 20 and Florida’s S. B.
7072 are facially unconstitutional.

															I cannot agree, however, with the Court’s
decision to opine on certain applications of those statutes. The
Court’s discussion is unnecessary to its holding. See Jama
v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 543 U.S.
335, 351, n. 12 (2005) (“Dictum settles nothing, even in the
court that utters it”). Moreover, the Court engages in the exact
type of analysis that it chastises the Courts of Appeals for
performing. It faults the Courts of Appeals for focusing on only
one subset of applications, rather than determining whether each
statute’s “full range of applications” are constitutional. See
ante, at 10, 12. But, the Court repeats that very same
error. Out of the sea of “variegated and complex” functions that
platforms perform, ante, at 11, the Court plucks out two
(Facebook’s News Feed and YouTube’s homepage), and declares that
they may be protected by the First Amendment. See ante, at
26 (opining on what the “current record suggests”). The Court does
so on a record that it itself describes as “incomplete” and
“underdeveloped,” ante, at 12, 20, and by sidestepping
several pressing factual and legal questions, see post, at
29–32 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment). As Justice Alito
explains, the Court’s approach is both unwarranted and mistaken.
See ibid.

															I agree with Justice Alito’s analysis and join
his opinion in full. I write separately to add two observations on
the merits and to highlight a more fundamental jurisdictional
problem. The trade associations have brought facial challenges
alleging that H. B. 20 and S. B. 7072 are
unconstitutional in many or all of their applications. But,
Art-icle III of the Constitution permits federal courts to
exercise judicial power only over “Cases” and “Controversies.”
Accordingly, federal courts can decide whether a statute is
constitutional only as applied to the parties before them—they lack
authority to deem a statute “facially” unconstitutional.

															I

															As Justice Alito explains, the trade
associations have failed to provide many of the basic facts
necessary to evaluate their challenges to H. B. 20 and
S. B. 7072. See post, at 22–29. I make two additional
observations.

															First, with respect to certain provisions of
H. B. 20 and S. B. 7072, the Court assumes that the
framework outlined in Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary
Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio, 471 U.S.
626 (1985), applies. See ante, at 11. In that case, the
Court held that laws requiring the disclosure of factual
information in commercial advertising may satisfy the First
Amendment if the disclosures are “reasonably related” to the
Government’s interest in preventing consumer deception. 471
U. S., at 651. Because the trade associations did not contest
Zauderer’s applicability before the Eleventh Circuit and
both lower courts applied its framework, I agree with the Court’s
decision to rely upon Zauderer at this stage. However, I
think we should reconsider Zauderer and its progeny. “I am
skeptical of the premise on which Zauderer rests—that, in
the commercial-speech context, the First Amendment interests
implicated by disclosure requirements are substantially weaker than
those at stake when speech is actually suppressed.” Milavetz,
Gallop & Milavetz, P. A. v. United States,
559 U.S.
229, 255 (2010) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															Second, the common-carrier doctrine should
continue to guide the lower courts’ examination of the trade
associations’ claims on remand. See post, at 18, and
n. 17, 30 (opinion of Alito, J.). “[O]ur legal system and its
British predecessor have long subjected certain businesses, known
as common carriers, to special regulations, including a general
requirement to serve all comers.” Biden v. Knight First
Amendment Institute at Columbia Univ., 593 U. S. ___, ___
(2021) (Thomas, J., concurring in grant of certiorari) (slip op.,
at 3). Moreover, “there is clear historical precedent for
regulating transportation and communications networks in a similar
manner as traditional common carriers” given their many
similarities. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 5). Though they
reached different conclusions, both the Fifth Circuit and the
Eleventh Circuit appropriately strove to apply the common-carrier
doctrine in assessing the constitutionality of H. B. 20 and
S. B. 7072 respectively. See 49 F. 4th 439, 469–480 (CA5
2022); NetChoice v. Attorney Gen., Fla., 34
F. 4th 1196, 1219–1222 (CA11 2022).

															The common-carrier doctrine may have weighty
implications for the trade associations’ claims. But, the same
factual barriers that preclude the Court from assessing the trade
associations’ claims under our First Amendment precedents also
prevent us from applying the common-carrier doctrine in this
posture. At a minimum, we would need to pinpoint the regulated
parties and specific conduct being regulated. On remand, however,
both lower courts should continue to consider the common-carrier
doctrine.

															II

															The opinions in these cases detail many of the
considerable hurdles that currently preclude resolution of the
trade associations’ claims. See ante, at 9–10; ante,
at 1–4 (Barrett, J., concurring); post, at 22–32 (opinion of
Alito, J.). The most significant problem of all, however, has yet
to be addressed: Federal courts lack authority to adjudicate the
trade associations’ facial challenges.

															Rather than allege that the statutes
impermissibly regulate them, the trade associations assert that
H. B. 20 and S. B. 7072 are actually unconstitutional in
most or all of their applications. This type of challenge, called a
facial challenge, is “an attack on a statute itself as opposed to a
particular application.” Los Angeles v. Patel,
576 U.S.
409, 415 (2015).

															Facial challenges are fundamentally at odds with
Article III. Because Article III limits federal courts’ judicial
power to cases or controversies, federal courts “lac[k] the power
to pronounce that [a] statute is unconstitutional” as applied to
nonparties. Americans for Prosperity Foundation v.
Bonta, 594 U.S. 595, 621 (2021) (Thomas, J., concurring in
part and concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks
omitted). Entertaining facial challenges in spite of that
limitation arrogates powers reserved to the political branches and
disturbs the relationship between the Federal Government and the
States. The practice of adjudicating facial challenges creates
practical concerns as well. Facial challenges’ dubious historical
roots further confirm that the doctrine should have no place in our
jurisprudence.

															A

															1

															Article III empowers federal courts to
exercise “judicial Power” only over “Cases” and “Controversies.”
This Court has long recognized that those terms impose substantive
constraints on the authority of federal courts. See Muskrat
v. United States, 219 U.S.
346, 356–358 (1911); see also Steel Co. v. Citizens
for Better Environment, 523 U.S.
83, 102 (1998). One corollary of the case-or-controversy
requirement is that while federal courts can judge the
constitutionality of statutes, they may do so only to the extent
necessary to resolve the case at hand. “It is emphatically the
province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law
is,” but only because “[t]hose who apply the rule to particular
cases, must of necessity expound and interpret that rule.”
Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177 (1803); see
Liverpool, New York & Philadelphia S. S. Co. v.
Commissioners of Emigration, 113 U.S.
33, 39 (1885) (“[The Court] has no jurisdiction to pronounce
any statute . . . irreconcilable with the Constitution,
except as it is called upon to adjudge the legal rights of
litigants in actual controversies”). Accordingly, “[e]xcept when
necessary” to resolve a case or controversy, “courts have no
charter to review and revise legislative and executive action.”
Summers v. Earth Island Institute, 555 U.S.
488, 492 (2009); see United States v. Raines,
362 U.S.
17, 20–21 (1960).

															These limitations on the power of judicial
review play an essential role in preserving our constitutional
structure. Our Constitution sets forth a “tripartite allocation of
power,” separating different types of powers across three co-equal
branches. DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U.S.
332, 341 (2006) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[E]ach
branch [is vested] with an exclusive form of power,” and “no branch
can encroach upon the powers confided to the others.”
Patchak v. Zinke, 583 U.S. 244, 250 (2018) (plurality
opinion) (internal quotation marks omitted). In the Judicial
Branch’s case, it is vested with the “ultimate and supreme” power
of judicial review. Chicago & Grand Trunk R. Co. v.
Wellman, 143 U.S.
339, 345 (1892). That power includes the authority to refuse to
apply a statute enacted and approved by the other two branches of
the Federal Government. But, the power of judicial review can be
wielded only in specific circumstances and to limited ends—to
resolve cases and controversies. Without that limitation, the
Judiciary would have an unchecked ability to enjoin duly enacted
statutes. Respecting the case-or-controversy requirement is
therefore necessary to “preven[t] the Federal Judiciary from
intruding upon the powers given to the other branches, and
confin[e] the federal courts to a properly judicial role.” Town
of Chester v. Laroe Estates, Inc., 581 U.S. 433, 438
(2017) (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted).

															2

															Facial challenges conflict with Article III’s
case-or-controversy requirement because they ask a federal court to
decide whether a statute might conflict with the Constitution in
cases that are not before the court.

															To bring a facial challenge under our
precedents, a plaintiff must ordinarily “establish that no set of
circumstances exists under which the Act would be valid.” United
States v. Salerno, 481 U.S.
739, 745 (1987). In the First Amendment context, we have
sometimes applied an even looser standard, called the overbreadth
doctrine. The overbreadth doctrine requires a plaintiff to
establish only that a statute “prohibits a substantial amount of
protected speech,” “relative to [its] plainly legitimate sweep.”
United States v. Williams, 553
U.S. 285, 292 (2008).

															Facial challenges ask courts to issue holdings
that are rarely, if ever, required to resolve a single case or
controversy. The only way a plaintiff gets into a federal court is
by showing that he “personally has suffered some actual or
threatened injury as a result of the putatively illegal conduct of
the defendant.” Blum v. Yaretsky, 457 U.S.
991, 999 (1982) (internal quotation marks omitted). And, the
only remedy a plaintiff should leave a federal court with is one
“limited to the inadequacy that produced the injury in fact that
the plaintiff has established.” Lewis v. Casey,
518 U.S.
343, 357 (1996). Accordingly, once a court decides whether a
statute can be validly enforced against the plaintiff who
challenges it, that case or controversy is resolved. Either the
court remedies the plaintiff ’s injury, or it determines that
the statute may be constitutionally applied to the plaintiff.

															Proceeding to decide the merits of possible
constitutional challenges that could be brought by other
plaintiffs is not necessary to resolve that case. Instead, any
holding with respect to potential future plaintiffs would be “no
more than an advisory opinion—which a federal court should never
issue at all, and especially should not issue with regard to
a constitutional question, as to which we seek to avoid even
nonadvisory opinions.” Chicago v. Morales,
527 U.S.
41, 77 (1999) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (citation omitted).

															Unsurprisingly, facial challenges are at odds
with doctrines enforcing the case-or-controversy requirement.
Pursuant to standing doctrine, for example, a plaintiff can
maintain a suit in a federal court—and thus invoke judicial
power—only if he has suffered an “injury” with a “traceable
connection” to the “complained-of conduct of the defendant.”
Steel Co., 523 U. S., at 103. Facial challenges
significantly relax those rules. Start with the injury requirement.
Facial challenges allow a plaintiff to challenge applications of a
statute that have not injured him. But see Acheson Hotels,
LLC v. Laufer, 601 U.S. 1, 10 (2023) (Thomas, J.,
concurring in judgment) (“To have standing, a plaintiff must assert
a violation of his [own] rights”). In fact, under our First
Amendment overbreadth doctrine, a plaintiff need not be injured at
all; he can challenge a statute that lawfully applies to him
so long as it would be unlawful to enforce it against others. See
United States v. Hansen, 599 U.S. 762, 769
(2023).

															Facial challenges also distort standing
doctrine’s redressability requirement. The Court has held that a
plaintiff has standing to sue only when his “requested relief will
redress the alleged injury.” Steel Co., 523 U. S., at
103. With a facial challenge, however, a plaintiff seeks to enjoin
every application of a statute—including ones that have nothing to
do with his injury. A plaintiff can ask, “Do [I] just want [the
court] to say that this statute cannot constitutionally be applied
to [me] in this case, or do [I] want to go for broke and try to get
the statute pronounced void in all its applications?”
Morales, 527 U. S., at 77 (opinion of Scalia, J.). In
this sense, the remedy sought by a facial challenge is akin to a
universal injunction—a practice that is itself “inconsistent with
longstanding limits on equitable relief and the power of Article
III courts.” Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667, 713
(2018) (Thomas, J., concurring); see Department of Homeland
Security v. New York, 589 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2020)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring in grant of stay) (slip op., at 2–3);
FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine, 602 U.S.
367, 402 (2024) (Thomas, J., concurring).

															Because deciding the constitutionality of a
statute as applied to nonparties is not necessary to resolve a case
or controversy, it is beyond a federal court’s constitutional
authority. Federal courts have “no power per se to review
and annul acts of Congress on the ground that they are
unconstitutional. That question may be considered only when the
justification for some direct injury suffered or threatened,
presenting a justiciable issue, is made to rest upon such an act.”
Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262
U.S. 447, 488 (1923). Resolving facial challenges thus violates
Article III.[1]

															3

															Adjudicating facial challenges also intrudes
upon powers reserved to the Legislative and Executive Branches and
the States. When a federal court decides an issue unnecessary for
resolving a case or controversy, the Judiciary assumes authority
beyond what the Constitution granted. Supra, at 5–6. That
necessarily alters the balance of powers: When one branch exceeds
its vested power, it becomes stronger relative to the other
branches. See Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company
Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U.S.
477, 500 (2010).

															Moreover, by exceeding their Article III powers,
federal courts risk interfering with the executive and legislative
functions. Facial challenges enable federal courts to review the
constitutionality of a statute in many or all of its
applications—often before the statute has even been enforced. In
practice, this provides federal courts a “general veto power
. . . upon the legislation of Congress.” Muskrat,
219 U. S., at 357. But, the Judicial Branch has no such
constitutional role in lawmaking. When courts take on the
supervisory role of judging statutes in the abstract, they thus
“assume a position of authority over the governmental acts of
another and co-equal department, an authority which plainly [they]
do not possess.” Mellon, 262 U. S., at 489.

															Comparing the effects of as-applied challenges
and facial challenges makes this point clear. With an as-applied
challenge, the Judiciary intrudes only as much as necessary on the
will “ ‘of the elected representatives of the people.’ ”
Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican
Party, 552 U.S.
442, 451 (2008). Assuming a court adheres to traditional
remedial limits, a successful as-applied challenge only prevents
application of the statute against that plaintiff. The Executive
Branch remains free to enforce the statute in all of its other
applications. And, the court’s decision provides some notice to the
political branches, enabling the Executive Branch to tailor future
enforcement of the statute to avoid violating the Constitution or
Congress to amend the statute.

															Facial challenges, however, force the Judiciary
to take a maximalist approach. A single plaintiff can immediately
call upon a federal court to declare an entire statute
unconstitutional, even before it has been applied to him. The
political branches have no opportunity to correct course, making
legislation an all-or-nothing proposition. The end result is that
“the democratic process” is “short circuit[ed]” and “laws embodying
the will of the people [are prevented] from being implemented in a
manner consistent with the Constitution.” Ibid.

															In a similar vein, facial challenges distort the
relationship between the Federal Government and the States. The
Constitution “establishes a system of dual sovereignty between the
States and the Federal Government.” Gregory v.
Ashcroft, 501 U.S.
452, 457 (1991). The States retain all powers “not delegated”
to the Federal Government and not “prohibited by [the Constitution]
to the States.” Amdt. 10. Facial challenges can upset this division
by shifting power from the States to the Federal Judiciary. Most
obviously, when a state law is challenged, a facial challenge
prevents that State from applying its own statute in a
constitutional manner. But, facial challenges can also force
federal courts to appropriate the role of state courts. To analyze
whether a statute is valid on its face, a court must determine the
statute’s scope. If a state court has yet to determine the scope of
its statute (a common occurrence with facial challenges), the
federal court must do so in the first instance. Facial challenges
thus increase the likelihood that federal courts must interpret
novel state-law questions—a role typically and appropriately
reserved for state courts.

															B

															In addition to their constitutional
infirmities, facial challenges also create practical problems. The
case-or-controversy requirement serves as the foundation of our
adversarial system. Rather than “ ‘sit[ting] as self-directed
boards of legal inquiry and research,’ ” federal courts serve
as “ ‘arbiters of legal questions presented and argued by the
parties before them.’ ” NASA v. Nelson,
562 U.S.
134, 147, n. 10 (2011) (quoting Carducci v.
Regan, 714 F.2d 171, 177 (CADC 1983) (opinion for the court
by Scalia, J.)). This system “assure[s] that the legal questions
presented to the court will be resolved . . . in a
concrete factual context conducive to a realistic appreciation of
the consequences of judicial action.” Valley Forge Christian
College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and
State, Inc., 454 U.S.
464, 472 (1982).

															Facial challenges disrupt the adversarial system
and increase the risk of judicial error as a result. A plaintiff
raising a facial challenge need not have any direct knowledge of
how the statute applies to others. In fact, since a facial
challenge may be brought before a statute has been enforced against
anyone, a plaintiff often can only guess how the statute
operates—even in his own case. For this reason, “[c]laims of facial
invalidity often rest on speculation,” Washington State
Grange, 552 U. S., at 450, and “factually barebones
records,” Sabri v. United States, 541 U.S.
600, 609 (2004). Federal courts are often called to give
“premature interpretations of statutes in areas where their
constitutional application might be cloudy.” Raines, 362
U. S., at 22. In short, facial challenges ask courts to
resolve potentially thorny constitutional questions with little
factual background and briefing by a party who may not be affected
by the outcome.

															C

															The problems with facial challenges are
particularly evident in the two cases before us. Even though the
trade associations challenge two state laws, the state actors have
been left out of the picture. State officials had no opportunity to
tailor the laws’ enforcement. Nor could the legislatures amend the
statutes before they were preliminarily enjoined. In addition,
neither set of state courts had a chance to interpret their own
State’s law or “accord [that] law a limiting construction to avoid
constitutional questions.” Washington State Grange, 552
U. S., at 450. Instead, federal courts construed these novel
state laws in the first instance. And, they did so with little
factual record to assist them. The trade associations’ reliance on
our questionable associational-standing doctrine is partially to
blame.[2] But, the fact that
the trade associations raise facial challenges has undeniably
played a significant role. With even simple fact patterns, a court
has little chance of determining whether a novel,
never-before-enforced state law can be constitutionally enforced
against nonparties without resorting to mere speculation. For cases
such as these, where the constitutional analysis depends on
complex, fact-specific questions, the task becomes impossible.

															D

															Facial challenges are particularly suspect
given their origins. They appear to be the product of two doctrines
that are themselves constitutionally questionable, vagueness and
overbreadth.

															At the time of the founding, it was well
understood that federal courts could hold a statute
unconstitutional only insofar as necessary to resolve a particular
case or controversy. See supra, at 5–6. The Founders were
certainly familiar with alternative systems that provided for the
free-floating review of duly enacted statutes. For example, the New
York Constitution of 1777 created a Council of Revision, composed
of the Governor, Chancellor, and New York Supreme Court. See
Hansen, 599 U. S., at 786 (Thomas, J., concurring). The
Council of Revision could object to “any measure of a [prospective]
bill” based on “not only [its] constitutionality . . .
but also [its] policy.” Id., at 787. If the Council lodged
an objection, the Legislature’s only options were to “conform to
[the Council’s] objections, override them by a two-thirds vote of
both Houses, or simply let the bill die.” Ibid. (internal
quotation marks omitted).

															In our Constitution, the Founders refused to
create a council of revision or involve the Federal Judiciary in
the business of reviewing statutes in the abstract. “Despite the
support of respected delegates . . . the Convention voted
against creating a federal council of revision on four different
occasions. No other proposal was considered and rejected so many
times.” Id., at 789 (citation omitted). Instead, the
Founders created a Judiciary with “only the authority to resolve
private disputes between particular parties, rather than matters
affecting the general public.” Ibid. (internal quotation
marks omitted). They considered judges “of all men the most unfit
to have a veto on laws before their enactment.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted). Therefore, they refused to
enlist judges in the business of reviewing statutes other than “as
an issue for decision in a concrete case or controversy.”[3] Ibid.

															For more than a century following the founding,
the Court generally adhered to the original understanding of the
narrow scope of judicial review. When the Court first discussed the
concept of judicial review in Marbury v. Madison, it
made clear that such review is limited to what is necessary for
resolving “a particular cas[e]” before a court. 1 Cranch, at 177;
see also supra, at 5–6. And, in case after case that
followed Marbury, the Court reiterated that federal courts
have no authority to reach beyond the parties before them to
facially invalidate a statute.[4]

															As best I can tell, the Court’s first departure
from those principles was the development of the vagueness
doctrine. See Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S.
591, 616–620 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment)
(describing history of vagueness doctrine). Before and at the time
of the founding, American and English courts dealt with vague laws
by “simply refus[ing] to apply them in individual cases.”
Id., at 615. After the unfortunate rise of “substantive” due
process, however, American courts began striking down statutes
wholesale as “unconstitutionally indefinite.” Id., at 617.
This Court first adopted that approach in 1914, see
International Harvester Co. of America v. Kentucky,
234 U.S.
216, and has since repeatedly used the vagueness doctrine “to
strike down democratically enacted laws” in the name of substantive
due process, Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U.S. 148, 210
(2018) (Thomas, J., dissenting); see Johnson, 576
U. S., at 618–621 (opinion of Thomas, J.). As I have
explained, I doubt that “our practice of striking down statutes as
unconstitutionally vague is consistent with the original meaning of
the Due Process Clause.” Dimaya, 584 U. S., at 206
(opinion of Thomas, J.); see Johnson, 576 U. S., at 622
(opinion of Thomas, J.).

															The vagueness doctrine was the direct ancestor
of one subset of modern facial challenges, the overbreadth
doctrine. See United States v. Sineneng-Smith, 590
U.S. 371, 385 (2020) (Thomas, J., concurring) (noting that the
overbreadth doctrine “developed as a result of the vagueness
doctrine’s application in the First Amendment context”). In
Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 U.S.
88 (1940), the Court deemed an antipicketing statute “invalid
on its face” due to its “sweeping proscription of freedom of
discussion.” Id., at 101–106. The Thornhill Court did
so “[w]ithout considering whether the defendant’s actual conduct
was entitled to First Amendment protection,” instead invalidating
the law because it “ ‘swept within its ambit . . .
activities that in ordinary circumstances constitute an exercise of
freedom of speech or of the press.’ ” Sineneng-Smith,
590 U. S., at 383 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (quoting
Thornhill, 310 U. S., at 97; alteration omitted).

															Thornhill’s approach quickly gained
traction in the First Amendment context. In the years to follow,
the Court “invoked [its] rationale to facially invalidate a wide
range of laws” concerning First Amendment rights—a practice that
became known as the overbreadth doctrine. Sineneng-Smith,
590 U. S., at 383. Under that doctrine, a court can invalidate
a statute if it “prohibits a substantial amount of protected
speech,” “relative to the statute’s plainly legitimate
sweep.”[5] Williams, 553
U. S., at 292. The Court has never attempted to ground the
overbreadth doctrine “in the text or history of the First
Amendment.” Sineneng-Smith, 590 U. S., at 384 (opinion
of Thomas, J.). Instead, the Court has supplied only “policy
considerations and value judgments.” Ibid.

															The overbreadth and vagueness doctrines’ method
of facial invalidation eventually spread to other areas of law,
setting in motion our modern facial challenge doctrine. For several
decades after Thornhill, the Court continued to resist the
broad use of facial challenges. For example, in Broadrick v.
Oklahoma, 413 U.S.
601 (1973), the Court emphasized that “[c]onstitutional
judgments, as Mr. Chief Justice Marshall recognized, are justified
only out of the necessity of adjudicating rights in particular
cases between the litigants brought before the Court.” Id.,
at 611. In that vein, the Court characterized “facial overbreadth
adjudication [as] an exception to our traditional rules of
practice.” Id., at 615. But, the Court eventually
entertained facial challenges more broadly where a plaintiff
established that “no set of circumstances exists under which the
Act would be valid.” [6]
Salerno, 481 U. S., at 745. Just as with the
overbreadth doctrine, the Court has yet to explain how facial
challenges are consistent with the Constitution’s text or
history.

															Given how our facial challenge doctrine seems to
have developed—with one doctrinal mistake leading to another—it is
no wonder that facial challenges create a host of constitutional
and practical issues. See supra, at 6–13. Rather than
perpetuate our mistakes, the Court should end them. “No principle
is more fundamental to the judiciary’s proper role in our system of
government than the constitutional limitation of federal-court
jurisdiction to actual cases or controversies.” Simon v.
Eastern Ky. Welfare Rights Organization, 426 U.S.
26, 37 (1976). Because that requirement precludes courts from
judging and enjoining statutes as applied to nonparties, the Court
should discontinue the practice of facial challenges.

															*  *  *

															The Court has recognized the problems that
facial challenges pose, emphasizing that they are “disfavored,”
Washington State Grange, 552 U. S., at 450, and “best
when infrequent,” Sabri, 541 U. S., at 608. The Court
reiterates those sentiments today. Ante, at 9, 30. But,
while sidelining facial challenges provides some measure of relief,
it ignores the real problem. Because federal courts are bound by
Article III’s case-or-controversy requirement, holding a statute
unconstitutional as applied to nonparties is not simply
disfavored—it exceeds the authority granted to federal courts. It
is high time the Court reconsiders its facial challenge
doctrine.

Notes
1
 This is not to say that
federal courts can never adjudicate a constitutional claim if a
plaintiff styles it as a facial challenge. Whenever a plaintiff
alleges a statute is unconstitutional in many or all of its
applications, that argument nearly always includes an allegation
that the statute is unconstitutional as applied to the plaintiff.
Federal courts are free to consider challenged statutes as applied
to the plaintiff before them and limit any relief accordingly. See
generally Americans for Prosperity Foundation v.
Bonta, 594 U.S. 595, 618–619 (2021); id., at 621
(Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment).
2
 The trade associations do
not allege that they are subject to H. B. 20 and S. B.
7072, but have brought suit to vindicate the rights of their
members. There is thus not a single party in these suits that is
actually regulated by the challenged statutes and can explain how
specific provisions will infringe on their First Amendment rights.
Instead, the trade associations assert their understanding of how
the challenged statutes will regulate nonparties. As I have
recently explained, “[a]ssociational standing raises constitutional
concerns.” See FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic
Medicine, 602 U.S. 367, 399 (2024) (concurring opinion).
Associational standing appears to conflict with Article III’s
injury and redressability requirements in many of the same ways as
facial challenges. I have serious doubts that either trade
association has standing to vicariously assert a member’s injury.
See id., at 400.
3
 “The later history of the
New York Council of Revision demonstrates the wisdom of the
Framers’ decision.” United States v. Hansen, 599 U.S.
762, 790 (2023) (Thomas, J., concurring). The Council’s ability to
lodge objections proved significant: “Over the course of its
existence, [the Council] returned 169 bills to the legislature; the
legislature, in turn, overrode only 51 of those vetoes and
reenacted at least 26 bills with modifications.” Ibid. The
Council did not shy away from controversial or weighty matters
either. It vetoed, among other things, “a bill barring those
convicted of adultery from remarrying” and a bill “declar[ing]
Loyalists aliens.” Ibid. In fact, the bill authorizing the
Erie Canal’s construction—“one of the most important measures in
the Nation’s history—survived the Council’s review only because
Chancellor James Kent changed his deciding vote at the last minute,
seemingly on a whim.” Ibid. Concerns over the Council’s
“intrusive involvement in the legislative process” eventually led
to its abolition in 1820. Ibid.
4
 See, e.g.,
Austin v. Aldermen, 7 Wall. 694, 699 (1869) (holding
that the Court could “only consider the statute in connection with
the case before” it and thus “our jurisdiction [wa]s at an end”
once it “ascertained that [the case] wrought no effect which the
act forbids”); Liverpool, New York & Philadelphia S. S.
Co. v. Commissioners of Emigration, 113 U.S.
33, 39 (1885) (the Court “has no jurisdiction to pronounce any
statute . . . irreconcilable with the Constitution,
except as it is called upon to adjudge the legal rights of
litigants in actual controversies”); Chicago & Grand Trunk
R. Co. v. Wellman, 143 U.S.
339, 345 (1892) (explaining that judicial review of a statute’s
constitutionality “is legitimate only in the last resort, and as a
necessity in the determination of real, earnest, and vital
controversy between individuals”); Muskrat v. United
States, 219 U.S.
346, 357 (1911) (“[T]here [i]s no general veto power in the
court upon the legislation of Congress”); Yazoo &
Mississippi Valley R. Co. v. Jackson Vinegar Co.,
226 U.S.
217, 219 (1912) (rejecting argument that statute was “void
in toto,” because the Court “must deal with the case in
hand and not with imaginary ones”); Dahnke-Walker Milling
Co. v. Bondurant, 257 U.S.
282, 289 (1921) (“[A] litigant can be heard to question a
statute’s validity only when and so far as it is being or is about
to be applied to his disadvantage”); Massachusetts v.
Mellon, 262 U.S.
447, 488 (1923) (Federal courts “have no power
per se to review and annul acts of Congress on the
ground that they are unconstitutional. That question may be
considered only when the justification for some direct injury
suffered or threatened, presenting a justiciable issue, is made to
rest upon such an act”).
5
 Although the Court’s
precedents describe an unconstitutionally overbroad statute as
facially “invalid,” “federal courts have no authority to erase a
duly enacted law from the statute books.” J. Mitchell, The
Writ-of-Erasure Fallacy, 104 Va. L. Rev. 933, 936 (2018); see
Sineneng-Smith, 590 U. S., at 387 (opinion of Thomas,
J.).
6
 Some Members of the Court
subsequently sought to apply a more lenient standard to all facial
challenges. See Washington State Grange v. Washington
State Republican Party, 552 U.S.
442, 449 (2008) (noting that “some Members of the Court have
criticized the Salerno formulation”); United States
v. Stevens, 559 U.S.
460, 472 (2010) (reserving the question of which standard
applies to “a typical facial attack”).


