::decision_cite:: 22-340
::decision_name::  Pulsifer v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–340

															_________________

															MARK E. PULSIFER, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eighth circuit

															[March 15, 2024]

															

															Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															The “safety valve” provision of federal
sentencing law exempts certain defendants from mandatory minimum
penalties, thus enabling courts to give them lighter prison terms.
To qualify for safety-valve relief, a defendant must meet various
criteria, one of which addresses his criminal history. That
criterion, in stylized form, requires that a defendant “does not
have A, B, and C”—where A, B, and C refer to three ways in which
past criminality may suggest future dangerousness and therefore
warrant a more severe sentence. In brief (with details below), A,
B, and C are “more than 4 criminal history points,” a “3-point
offense,” and a “2-point violent offense.”

															The question presented is how to understand the
criminal-history requirement. The Government contends that the
phrase “does not have A, B, and C” creates a checklist with three
distinct conditions. On that view, a defendant meets the
requirement (and so is eligible for safety-valve relief ) if
he does not have A, does not have B, and does not have C. Or stated
conversely, a person fails to meet the requirement (and so cannot
get relief ) if he has any one of the three. The petitioner
here instead contends that the phrase “does not have A, B, and C”
sets out a single, amalgamated condition for relief. On his
reading, a defendant meets the requirement (and is eligible for
relief ) so long as he does not have the combination of
A, B, and C. Or put conversely, he fails to meet the requirement
(and cannot get relief ) only when he has all three. Today, we
agree with the Government’s view of the criminal-history
provision.

															I

															Congress sometimes establishes mandatory
minimum penalties for crimes, including drug offenses. Those
provisions put a lower limit on a court’s sentencing discretion,
reflecting Congress’s judgment that specified conduct demands no
less than a specified punishment. For drug offenses of the kind
involved here, the existence and length of minimum penalties
typically depend on the type and quantity of the drug at issue, the
harm resulting from the crime, and (relevant here) the defendant’s
criminal history.

															The safety-valve provision, 18
U. S. C. §3553(f ), offers some defendants convicted
of drug offenses an escape from otherwise applicable mandatory
minimums. Under the provision, a court is to sentence a defendant
“without regard to any statutory minimum” if it finds that five
criteria are met. Ibid. Three of the criteria focus on
characteristics of the offense—in brief, whether the defendant used
violence; whether the crime resulted in death or serious injury;
and whether the defendant acted as a ringleader. See
§3553(f )(2)–(4). One of the criteria addresses the
defendant’s cooperation with the Government. See §3553(f )(5).
And one—the first listed and the most relevant here—concerns the
defendant’s criminal history. See §3553(f )(1). The complete
text of the safety-valve provision is set out in this opinion’s
appendix.

															The criminal-history requirement—we usually call
it Paragraph (f )(1)—recently underwent a substantial
revision, making it easier for a defendant to meet. As originally
enacted, the paragraph limited safety-valve relief to defendants
who “d[id] not have more than 1 criminal history point, as
determined under the sentencing guidelines.” Violent Crime Control
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 108Stat. 1985. What that meant in
practice—we explain why just below—was that anything more than a
single minor crime barred a defendant from gaining relief. But that
is no longer so. In the First Step Act of 2018, Congress relaxed
the safety-valve provision’s criminal-history requirement, enabling
defendants with more significant criminal records to qualify. Pub.
L. 115–391, 132Stat. 5221. Today, Paragraph (f )(1) is met if
“the court finds at sentencing” that:

															the defendant does not have—

															(A)more than 4 criminal history points,
excluding any criminal history points resulting from a 1-point
offense, as determined under the sentencing guidelines;

															(B)a prior 3-point offense, as determined under
the sentencing guidelines; and

															(C)a prior 2-point violent offense, as
determined under the sentencing guidelines.

															And if the defendant also meets Section
3553(f )’s other four criteria, he becomes exempt from a
statutory minimum.

															As the text makes clear, the new Paragraph
(f )(1) (like the old one) turns on the defendant’s
criminal-history points under the Guidelines. In general, the
severity of Guidelines sentencing recommendations increases with
the number of criminal-history points the defendant has (often
called his criminal-history score). And the Guidelines assign more
points to more serious prior offenses. There is a caveat to that
rule, which will become pertinent later. See infra, at
17–20. Some prior convictions, even if for serious offenses, do not
add any points to a defendant’s score. That is true, for example,
if the conviction is quite old or if it was rendered by a foreign
court. See U. S. Sentencing Guidelines (USSG) §4A1.2(e)(3),
(h). But putting such exceptions aside, convictions resulting in
longer prison sentences add more points to a defendant’s total. As
previewed above, the Guidelines award one point for minor
offenses—specifically, for those resulting in sentences of less
than 60 days. In the new Paragraph (f )(1), those minor
sentences do not matter at all: Because of the “excluding” phrase,
they cannot, either alone or in combination, prevent a defendant
from gaining safety-valve relief. But longer sentences, generating
more points, fall within the paragraph’s notice. A prison sentence
of between 60 days and 13 months earns two points under the
Guidelines. See §4A1.1(b). So a conviction punished with that
sentence will count, for purposes of the paragraph, as a “prior
2-point offense,” assuming it is also “violent” (as defined in a
nearby provision). §3553(f )(1)(C), (g). Moving up another
notch, a sentence exceeding 13 months earns three points under the
Guidelines. See §4A1.1(a). So a conviction giving rise to that
greater penalty (whether or not violent) will qualify under the
paragraph as a “prior 3-point offense.” §3553(f )(1)(B).

															This case involves a dispute about whether
Paragraph (f )(1) bars petitioner Mark Pulsifer from gaining
safety-valve relief. Pulsifer pleaded guilty in 2020 to
distributing at least 50 grams of methamphetamine. He faced a
mandatory minimum of 15 years in prison unless the safety-valve
provision came to his aid. The Government claimed it did not
because Pulsifer could not meet its criminal-history requirement.
Pulsifer had two relevant prior convictions, each for a three-point
offense. In the Government’s view, that fact disqualified Pulsifer
from obtaining relief several times over. He had not just one but
two “prior 3-point offense[s],” as specified in Subparagraph B of
the requirement. And because three plus three equals six, he also
had “more than 4 criminal history points,” as specified in
Subparagraph A. But Pulsifer claimed that was still not enough. He
pointed out that his criminal record lacked a “2-point violent
offense,” as specified in Subparagraph C. And in his view, only the
combination of the items listed in the three subparagraphs—the full
package, as it were—could prevent him from getting safety-valve
relief.

															The District Court rejected Pulsifer’s argument,
ruling that a defendant is “ineligible for safety valve” relief if
he has any of the “three things” specified in Paragraph
(f )(1). App. to Pet. for Cert. 35a–36a. The mandatory
minimum, the court concluded, thus applied to Pulsifer’s
sentence.

															The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
affirmed. The court framed the question as “in what sense the
statute uses the word ‘and.’ ” 39 F. 4th 1018, 1021
(2022). In the abstract, the court stated, the phrase “the
defendant does not have (A), (B), and (C)” might be read in two
different ways. It could mean that the defendant does not have the
combination of the “three elements listed in (A), (B), and (C),” as
Pulsifer urged. Ibid. Or it could mean, as the Government
argued, that the defendant does not have every one of those
elements—in other words, that he does not have (A), does not have
(B), and does not have (C). In choosing between those readings, the
court found a “strong textual basis” to prefer the Government’s.
Ibid. If Pulsifer were right, the court explained,
Subparagraph A would be “rendered superfluous”—without the
slightest effect. Ibid. “A defendant who has a prior
three-point offense under [Subparagraph B] and a prior two-point
violent offense under [Subparagraph C] would always meet the
criterion in [Subparagraph A], because he would always have more
than four criminal history points.” Ibid. That was reason
enough to read Paragraph (f )(1) the other way—as an
“eligibility checklist” of three distinct conditions, each of which
the defendant must meet to qualify for safety-valve relief.
Id., at 1022. And on that view, the court concluded,
Pulsifer could not escape a mandatory minimum: Because he had a
pair of three-point offenses, it was simply “immaterial” that he
did not also “have a prior two-point violent offense.” Id.,
at 1022–1023.

															We granted certiorari, 598 U. S. ___
(2023), because the Courts of Appeals have split over how to read
the safety-valve provision’s criminal-history requirement.[1] Today, we adopt the Government’s
view, and so affirm the decision below. A defendant is eligible for
safety-valve relief under Paragraph (f )(1) only if he “does
not have” all three of the items listed—or said more specifically,
does not have four criminal-history points, does not have a prior
three-point offense, and does not have a prior two-point violent
offense. The paragraph thus creates an eligibility checklist, and
demands that a defendant satisfy every one of its conditions.

															II

															We start with Paragraph (f )(1)’s
grammatical structure, because Pulsifer’s main argument (and
initially the dissent’s) is that it resolves this case. See Brief
for Pulsifer 16–20; post, at 7–8 (opinion of Gorsuch,
J.).[2] Recall that the
paragraph requires a court to find that the defendant does not have
the features specified in Subparagraphs A, B, and C. “Because
Congress used ‘and’ to connect” those subparagraphs, Pulsifer
contends, “a defendant is ineligible” for safety-valve relief “only
if he has the complete combo”—i.e., more than four
criminal-history points plus a prior three-point offense plus a
prior two-point violent one. Brief for Pulsifer 19. That result
follows, Pulsifer claims, simply from “what ordinary grammar says.”
Tr. of Oral Arg. 3. But in fact grammar does not say so much. There
are two grammatically permissible ways to read Paragraph
(f )(1). Yes, one is Pulsifer’s. But the other is the
Government’s—that a defendant is ineligible for relief unless he
can satisfy each of the paragraph’s three conditions. The choice
between the two, as this Part shows, is not a matter of grammatical
rules. It can sensibly be made only by examining, as the next Part
does, the paragraph’s content, as read in conjunction with the
Guidelines. Or, as we usually say in statutory construction cases,
by reviewing text in context.

															“And,” in grammatical terms, is of course a
conjunction—a word whose function is to connect specified items.
Both parties here agree with that elementary proposition. See Brief
for Pulsifer 18; Brief for United States 14. The word “and,” each
might say, means . . . well, and. Indeed, to the extent
elaboration is needed, both parties select the same definition from
the same dictionary. “And,” they recite in concert, means “along
with or together with.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 80 (1993); see Brief for Pulsifer 18; Brief for United
States 14.

															Where things get more complicated is in figuring
out what goes along or together with what—or otherwise said, what
the “and” in Paragraph (f )(1) connects. As Pulsifer reads the
paragraph, the “and” joins three features of a defendant’s criminal
history into a single disqualifying characteristic. The conjunction
of Subparagraphs A, B, and C produces the thing he labels “the
complete combo”; the question then becomes whether the defendant
has or “does not have” that full package. Brief for Pulsifer 19;
§3553(f )(1). Some grade-school math notation may help reveal
the proposed ordering. It is as if Pulsifer inserted parentheses
into the paragraph, so that it asks whether “the defendant does not
have (A, B, and C).” Much as a student would solve
“5 - (2 + 1)” by first adding 2 and 1 and then
subtracting the sum from 5, so Pulsifer wants a court first to
combine A, B, and C and then to determine whether the defendant has
the total. By contrast, the Government reads the statute without
parentheses, and so arrives at a different conclusion. On its view,
the “

															The Government’s view rests on a routine aspect
of expression—that an introductory phrase (here, “does not have”)
may apply to, or modify, several terms coming after it, one by one
by one. Suppose a person says after visiting a bookstore, “I bought
a novel, a memoir, and a travel guide.” That is just a more
efficient way of saying “I bought a novel, bought a memoir, and
bought a travel guide.” The verb in the sentence carries over—some
grammarians use the term “distribut[es]”—to every item on the
ensuing list. B. Garner, Dictionary of Legal Usage 639 (3d ed.
2011). That practice is pervasive, indeed inescapable, in every
kind of speech and writing. Consider this, perhaps half-remembered
line from childhood: “On Saturday he ate through one piece of
chocolate cake, one ice-cream cone, one pickle, one slice of Swiss
cheese, one slice of salami, one lollipop, one piece of cherry pie,
one sausage, one cupcake, and one slice of watermelon.” E. Carle,
The Very Hungry Caterpillar 15–16 (2018). The introductory words
“ate through” apply independently and equivalently to each of the
ten foodstuffs that follow. Or if that example seems too trifling,
take a couple from the Constitution. Article III provides that
“[t]he judicial Power shall extend to all Cases . . .
arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and
Treaties.” §2. That statement means—but says more concisely—that
the judicial power extends to cases arising under the Constitution;
extends to cases arising under federal law; and extends to cases
arising under treaties. The provision does not (as Pulsifer’s view
might suggest) limit judges to hearing the few cases arising
simultaneously under all three kinds of law. Similarly, Article I
of the Constitution enables Congress “[t]o regulate Commerce with
foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian
Tribes.” §8, cl. 3. That authorization goes to commerce involving
each kind of entity, not just to commerce involving the three at
once. So again, the verb phrase operates on each term
seriatim, not on the combination of the three.[3]

															Pulsifer claims that verb phrases do not work
the same way when “framed in the negative.” Reply Brief 2. One of
his favorite examples is “don’t drink and drive.” Brief for
Pulsifer 16. That “doesn’t mean,” he observes, “that you shouldn’t
drink and that you shouldn’t drive, but only [means] that you
shouldn’t do both at the same time.” Id., at 18 (emphasis
deleted). So too, he says, for “don’t clean the bathroom with
bleach and ammonia.” Id., at 12 (emphasis deleted). The
prohibition does not go to bleach alone and to ammonia alone;
instead, it goes only to the two in conjunction. To return to math
notation, the statement is best understood as “don’t clean with
(bleach and ammonia),” rather than “don’t clean with bleach and
don’t clean with ammonia.” See supra, at 7–8. And so too, he
says, here: Paragraph (f )(1) conditions relief on a court’s
finding that a defendant “does not have (A, B, and C),” rather than
that he “does not have A, does not have B, and does not have
C.”

															But for every negative statement Pulsifer offers
up, another cuts the opposite way (suggesting, as we later discuss,
that here grammar is not the primary determinant of meaning).
Consider two sentences discussed in The Cambridge Grammar of the
English Language. If someone says “I’m not free on Saturday and
Sunday,” the Grammar notes, he most likely means “I’m not free on
Saturday and I’m not free on Sunday”; he is not saying that
although he cannot go away for a full weekend, he can make plans on
one of those days. See R. Huddleston & G. Pullum 1298–1299
(2002) (emphasis deleted). Similarly, if a person says, “I didn’t
like his mother and father,”Ibid. (emphasis
deleted).[4] Or take an example
raised in oral argument pertaining, like Paragraph (f )(1), to
an eligibility requirement: A hospital tells you that it can
perform a medical procedure only if you “don’t eat, drink, and
smoke for the preceding 12 hours.” See Tr. of Oral Arg. 6–8. Even
Pulsifer’s counsel agreed that he would not feel free to have a
steak and martini so long as he abstained from tobacco. See
ibid. The “don’t” here, unlike in Pulsifer’s examples,
carries over to each action on the list (eating, drinking, and
smoking alike)—not just to the three in tandem.

															And if those examples of negatively framed
statements, both Pulsifer’s and ours, seem a tad conversational,
consider a statute strikingly similar in form to Paragraph
(f )(1). First return to that paragraph to remind yourself of
how it looks and reads. See supra, at 3. Now check out 34
U. S. C. §20101(f ):

															As used in this section, the term “offenses
against the United States” does not include—

															(1)a criminal violation of the Uniform Code of
Military Justice (10 U. S. C. 801 et seq.);

															(2)an offense against the laws of the District
of Columbia; and

															(3)an offense triable by an Indian tribal court
or Court of Indian Offenses.

															The “does not include” language at the top of
course refers independently to crimes satisfying (1), crimes
satisfying (2), and crimes satisfying (3)—not to whatever crimes
manage to satisfy (1), (2), and (3) all at once. Or said otherwise,
the statute means exactly what it would mean if Congress had
stripped the phrase “does not include” from the prefatory line and
repeated it three times in the subsequent list. Congress, we
recognize, just opted to draft more concisely. And so too it could
have made that choice in drafting Paragraph (f )(1)—with the
“does not have” phrase referring to every item that follows. No
grammatical principle precludes that understanding of what Congress
wrote.

															Pulsifer protests that using the word “or”
(instead of “and”) would have better conveyed the Government’s
reading, but that claim also fails. His basic objection (echoed in
the dissent, see post, at 16–17) is that Congress could have
expressed its intent more clearly. “If the government is right”
about Paragraph (f )(1)’s meaning, Pulsifer asks, “why didn’t
Congress just use ‘or’?”; doing so would have shown “unequivocally”
that a defendant must meet all three of the specified conditions.
Reply Brief 16; Tr. of Oral Arg. 10. But to begin with, we do not
demand (or in truth expect) that Congress draft in the most
translucent way possible. We have “routinely construed statutes to
have a particular meaning even as we acknowledged that Congress
could have expressed itself more clearly.” Luna Torres v.
Lynch, 578 U.S. 452, 472 (2016) (citing cases). And anyway,
we doubt that substituting “or” for “and” would have delivered us
from interpretive controversy. Instead, we would likely have
confronted the mirror image of the dispute before us. The
Government would have read the requirement that a defendant “does
not have A, B, or C” to mean that he “does not have (A, B, or C).”
So a defendant would get safety-valve relief only if he doesn’t
have any of the three listed criminal-history features. But
Pulsifer, we suspect, would have read the same requirement to mean
that a defendant “does not have A, does not have B, or does not
have C.” So he would get safety-valve relief as long as he doesn’t
have a single one of the listed features. That reading too is
possible when viewed only as a matter of abstract grammar, divorced
from any analysis of A, B, and C’s content. Even with Pulsifer’s
proposed redrafting, then, the grammatical back-and-forth would
continue.[5]

															In fact, we can see why a Congress wishing to
express the Government’s view might have chosen to use “and.”
Suppose that before putting words to the page, Congress had decided
(as the Government says) to create an eligibility checklist,
requiring a defendant to meet three distinct conditions before
getting safety-valve relief. In the subsequent drafting process, an
“and” could well have seemed intuitive. After all, on the
Government’s “checklist” view, a defendant must meet every one of
three conditions—this one and this one and this one.
Or said more concretely, the defendant must not have “more than 4
criminal history points” and must not have a “3-point
offense” and must not have a “2-point violent offense.” So
why not use an . . . “and”? It serves to connect the
three necessary conditions coming off the (efficient) prefatory
language. In other words, Congress might have thought that use of
the conjunctive word “and” would reflect the needed conjunction of
three requirements.

															Consider, as a summary of all these points,
Pulsifer’s own main example, because it shows why Paragraph
(f )(1)’s grammatical structure cannot decide this case—and
points to the kind of analysis needed instead. Pulsifer offers a
college policy, with an “and” connecting three provisions:

															All student-athletes are eligible for an
academic scholarship, provided that the student during the previous
semester did not—

															(A)miss more than five classes;

															(B)fail to submit a paper in the semesterly,
campus-wide writing competition; and

															(C)earn less than a 3.0 GPA.

															Brief for Pulsifer 19 (emphasis deleted). In
Pulsifer’s view, the policy is clear: A student may retain his
scholarship unless he flunks “all three” of the conditions.
Ibid. So a student, Pulsifer contends, is in the clear if he
“submitted a paper in the writing competition and earned a 3.4 GPA
. . . even though he missed seven classes.” Ibid.
Which sounds reasonable enough. But how about this one: A student
who misses only four classes, but fails to submit a competition
paper and “earns” a 1.0 GPA. Or similarly, a student who submits a
(terrible) paper, while missing all his classes and obtaining the
same “D” average. Is it now so clear that the policy allows a
student to flunk two of the conditions, rather than requiring him
to satisfy all three? Or is it, at the least, uncertain? And even
supposing not, consider a variation:

															All student-athletes are eligible for an
academic scholarship, provided that the student during the previous
semester did not—

															(A)fail a course;

															(B)commit plagiarism; and

															(C)get arrested.

															A student would need a lot of confidence to
argue that he remains scholarship-eligible when he (A) failed a
course, and (B) committed plagiarism, but (C) managed to evade
arrest. That reading—Pulsifer’s reading—is grammatically possible.
But so too is the opposite—that a student must meet all three
conditions. And when we think about the content of the policy—what
(A), (B), and (C) actually say—against the backdrop of all we know
(or perchance all the college handbook tells us) about academic
scholarships, we cannot read the revised hypothetical in Pulsifer’s
way.

															The takeaway is this: Paragraph (f )(1)
cannot be construed in the abstract, as if all a reader has to go
on is the stripped-down phrase “the defendant does not have A, B,
and C.” That might require the defendant not to have (A, B, and
C)—i.e., the combination of the three. Or it might require
the defendant not to have A, and not to have B, and not to have
C—i.e., each of the three. Really, it all depends. (It is
notable that even the dissent must in the end concede the point,
noting that whether a speaker “intend[s] for a listener to
distribute words implicitly” depends on the context. See
post, at 15–16; supra, at 6, and n. 2). The way
a reader assigns meaning to the phrase is to look at the substance
of A, B, and C—the items on the list and the way they interact, as
against relevant background understandings. Recall a couple of
examples. See supra, at 9–11. We interpret the injunction
against drinking and driving in Pulsifer’s way—“do not (A and
B)”—because the two activities are usually perilous only in
combination. We interpret the injunction against eating and
drinking before surgery in the Government’s way—“do not A and do
not B”—because each activity alone is likely to have adverse
consequence. Similarly here, the meaning of Paragraph (f )(1)
may become clear if we examine the content of its three
subparagraphs—what they say and how they relate to each other—as
well as how they fit with other pertinent law. Or stated in the
usual language of statutory construction, the answer may lie in
considering the paragraph’s text in its legal context.

															III

															A

															And indeed, that inquiry into text and context
makes Paragraph (f )(1)’s meaning clear. The paragraph creates
an eligibility checklist. It specifies three necessary conditions
for safety-valve relief—that the defendant not have more than four
criminal-history points, not have a prior three-point offense, and
not have a prior two-point violent offense. Reading the paragraph
instead to set out a single condition—that the defendant not have
the combination of the listed characteristics—would create
two statutory difficulties. First, Subparagraph A would become
superfluous—without any operative significance. That is because if
a defendant has a three-point offense under Subparagraph B and a
two-point offense under Subparagraph C, he will always have more
than four criminal-history points under Subparagraph A. Second,
defendants’ eligibility for relief would not correspond to the
seriousness of their criminal records. Instead, a defendant with
numerous violent three-point offenses could get relief because he
happens not to have a two-point offense. The content of
Subparagraphs A, B, and C, especially as read against the
Guidelines, thus answers the statutory puzzle here—reducing two
grammatical possibilities to just one plausible construction.

															Begin with superfluity. Or actually with its
absence—because there is none under the Government’s reading. Each
subparagraph does independent work, disqualifying defendants from
relief even when the others would not. Subparagraph A disqualifies
defendants who have more than four criminal-history points
(excluding those from a one-point offense), even if they do not
have a prior three-point offense or a prior two-point violent
offense. So, for example, a defendant with three non-violent
two-point offenses will be barred. Subparagraph B, in turn,
disqualifies defendants who have any prior three-point offense,
even if they do not have a two-point violent offense or more than
four total points. And finally, Subparagraph C disqualifies
defendants who have a prior two-point violent offense, even if they
do not have a three-point offense or more than four points. The
paragraph thus excludes (A) various repeat offenders, along with
anyone having even a single conviction that (B) resulted in a
sufficiently long prison sentence or (C) resulted in a shorter
sentence but involved violence. Every part of the paragraph has a
function.

															But that is not so under Pulsifer’s reading, as
a bit of arithmetic reveals. Pulsifer’s view, once again, is that
Paragraph (f )(1) disqualifies only defendants with the
combination of the characteristics in Subparagraphs A, B, and C—so
more than four criminal-history points, a prior three-point
offense, and a prior two-point violent one. But because 3 + 2 = 5,
and because 5 is more than 4, a defendant with a three-point
offense (Subparagraph B) and a two-point violent offense
(Subparagraph C) will necessarily have more than four history
points (Subparagraph A). So Subparagraph A becomes meaningless: It
does no independent work. Remove it from the statute, and what is
left will make the exact same people eligible (and ineligible) for
relief.

															And that kind of superfluity, in and of itself,
refutes Pulsifer’s reading. The problem here is no odd word or
stray phrase, which might have escaped Congress’s notice.
Pulsifer’s reading would negate one of three—indeed, the first of
three—provisions in the very paragraph he is trying to interpret.
When a statutory construction thus “render[s] an entire
subparagraph meaningless,” this Court has noted, the canon against
surplusage applies with special force. National Assn. of
Mfrs. v. Department of Defense, 583 U.S. 109, 128
(2018); see Chicago v. Fulton, 592 U.S. 154, 159
(2021). And still more when the subparagraph is so evidently
designed to serve a concrete function. In addressing eligibility
for sentencing relief, Congress specified three particular features
of a defendant’s criminal history—A, B, and C. It would not have
done so if A had no possible effect. It would then have enacted: B
and C. But while that is the paragraph Pulsifer’s reading produces,
it is not the paragraph Congress wrote.

															To escape that quandary, Pulsifer contends that
under the Guidelines a three-point offense and a two-point offense
do not always total five criminal-history points. (The dissent
reiterates Pulsifer’s assertion. See post, at 21–24.) The
argument begins with a point not in dispute: Some prior
convictions, as noted earlier, add zero points to a defendant’s
criminal-history score. See supra, at 3. That is true if the
conviction is quite old; if it was rendered in a military, tribal
or foreign court; or if it merged into another conviction because,
for example, the two arose from “the same charging instrument.”
§4A1.2(a)(2); see §4A1.2(e), (g)–(i). The key move in Pulsifer’s
argument is the next one: He claims that a prior offense adding
zero points to a history score can still be a three-point or
two-point offense under Paragraph (f )(1). That happens, he
says, when the sentence given for the offense was long enough to
otherwise add those points—meaning, in the absence of the
trait that reduced points to zero. See Brief for Pulsifer 36–41.
Take an example: A very old conviction contributes zero points to a
defendant’s history score, no matter how long the sentence. Still,
Pulsifer contends, it is a three-point offense when the sentence
given was sufficiently long (over 13 months) to add three points in
a case not very old. And once that proposition is accepted,
Pulsifer says, superfluity disappears. Suppose a defendant has,
along with the old conviction just described, a newer two-point
violent offense. The old conviction, Pulsifer maintains, is a
three-point offense satisfying Subparagraph B. And the new
conviction satisfies Subparagraph C. But the defendant has only two
criminal-history points—zero from the old offense and two from the
new—which is not enough to satisfy Subparagraph A. So that
subparagraph, Pulsifer concludes, has an effect: It keeps such a
defendant eligible for safety-valve relief.

															But Pulsifer’s argument craters because its key
move is wrong: Contrary to his view, there is no such thing under
the Guidelines as a three-point or two-point offense adding zero
points. Under Subparagraphs B and C, the terms “3-point offense”
and “2-point violent offense” are “as determined under the
sentencing guidelines.” §3553(f )(1)(B)–(C). And the
Guidelines assign points to an offense only in the context, and for
the purpose, of “[a]dd[ing]” them to a defendant’s “criminal
history” “total.” §4A1.1. So a conviction becomes a three- or
two-point offense only when—only because—it adds three or
two points to a total history score. Or said the other way round,
only the addition of three or two points to that score makes the
offense a three- or two-point offense. The corollary is that a
conviction adding zero points—because, say, it is very old—cannot
be a three- or two-point offense. It is (unsurprisingly) a
zero-point offense—whatever would be the case if the conviction
were newer. For that reason, such a conviction cannot aid
Pulsifer’s effort to find a function for Subparagraph A. Because
only the addition of three or two points can make an offense a
three- or two-point offense, a defendant who has a prior
three-point offense and a prior two-point violent offense will
always have (arithmetic again) more than four points total. The
Guidelines’ mechanics thus foreclose Pulsifer’s effort to erase the
superfluity his reading creates.[6]

															Yet more, Pulsifer’s effort founders on the
Guidelines’ judgments, reflected in Paragraph (f )(1), about
which prior offenses warrant enhanced punishment. Consider what
Pulsifer’s zero-to-three claim entails. Because an offense adding
zero points can on his account satisfy Subparagraph B or C, it can
help prevent a defendant from gaining safety-valve relief. But that
result ill comports with the Guidelines. There are, after all,
reasons why the Guidelines decline to assign points to certain
offenses. The specifics vary, but each embodies a judgment that
some types of prior convictions should not have the usual weight in
determining a current sentence. Maybe the prior conviction is not
as reliable as most. Or maybe it is not so good a measure of the
defendant’s future dangerousness. Whatever the precise explanation,
the Guidelines give zero points to an offense in order to ensure
that it not increase a later punishment. Except that under
Pulsifer’s view it could do just that: Offenses that the Guidelines
deem irrelevant to future sentencing might end up triggering a
mandatory minimum. And likewise, Pulsifer’s view conflicts with a
discrete feature of Paragraph (f )(1). Recall that under that
paragraph, an offense earning one point cannot affect
eligibility for relief, either alone or in combination with any
other offense—presumably because a one-point offense is just too
minor. See §3553(f )(1); supra, at 4. Yet Pulsifer’s
theory would allow an offense adding zero points to
contribute to a finding that relief is barred. That claim is,
again, too out-of-sync with the statutory framework to offer an
escape from his “3 + 2 = 5” superfluity problem.

															And beyond that problem lies a second, this one
relating to the way Paragraph (f )(1) precludes safety-valve
relief for defendants with serious criminal histories. The
paragraph operates as a gatekeeper: It helps get some defendants
into, and keeps other defendants out of, a world free of mandatory
minimums. And the criteria for selection, evident on the
paragraph’s face, relate to just how bad a defendant’s criminal
record is. Pulsifer himself recognizes that fact: In describing
Paragraph (f )(1), he notes that “subparagraph (A) targets
recidivism”; that “subparagraph (B) targets serious offenses”
leading to lengthy prison terms; and that “subparagraph (C) targets
violent offenses” even though resulting in lesser sentences. Brief
for Pulsifer 25; see id., at 44 (noting that each
subparagraph addresses a “type[ ] of behavior suggestive of
future dangerousness”). The paragraph thus focuses on the kinds of
past criminal behavior that under the Guidelines trigger enhanced
penalties. Over and over, the Guidelines presume that defendants
with worse criminal records—exhibiting recidivism, lengthy
sentences, and violence—are “deserving of greater punishment.” USSG
ch. 4, pt. A, intro. comment.; see §4A1.1; USSG ch. 5, pt. A.
Paragraph (f )(1), in line with its repeated invocation of the
Guidelines, expresses the same understanding. Put simply, the
paragraph sorts defendants for relief (or not) based on the
seriousness of their criminal history.

															Under the Government’s reading, Paragraph
(f )(1) performs that function without a hitch. When the
defendant has committed multiple non-minor offenses, he cannot get
relief (Subparagraph A). And so too when he has committed even a
single offense punished with a lengthy prison sentence
(Subparagraph B) or involving violence (Subparagraph C). Only a
defendant with none of those markers—a defendant who can check off
every one of the three “does not have” requirements—is eligible for
relief. So the paragraph unerringly separates more serious prior
offenders from less serious ones, allowing only the latter through
the gate.

															That does not happen under Pulsifer’s
construction. To the contrary, his reading would allow relief to
defendants with more serious records while barring relief to
defendants with less serious ones. Or said otherwise, the sorting
accomplished by Pulsifer’s reading does not match what Paragraph
(f )(1) and the Guidelines call for. Consider two hypothetical
defendants. One has five criminal-history points from a prior
three-point offense and a prior two-point violent offense. The
other has 15 criminal-history points from five prior three-point
offenses, every last one of a violent nature, but . . .
has no two-point violent offense. (All his crimes were too serious
to wind up in the two-point category.) Which of the two defendants
is the more serious prior offender? The latter of course: His
record exhibits greater recidivism, lengthier sentences, and more
violence. But under Pulsifer’s view of Paragraph (f )(1),
which of the two defendants is excluded from relief? The former
alone. For want of a two-point offense, the latter remains eligible
to avoid a mandatory minimum. The paragraph thus fails to divide,
at the gate for safety-valve relief, more from less serious prior
offenders.[7]

															And contrary to Pulsifer’s view, that problem
cannot be solved by resort to a sentencing judge’s discretion.
Notably, Pulsifer does not argue that there is any rhyme or reason
to making our serial three-point violent offender eligible for
safety-valve relief. He says only that Congress “had no reason to
be concerned” about that outcome because it knew “that a sentencing
court would still have discretion to impose a proportionate
sentence.” Brief for Pulsifer 25; see id., at 45; see also
post, at 28–29 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (similarly relying
on judges’ ability, even without mandatory minimums, to impose
lengthy sentences). But that “trust in discretion” claim cannot
here work. If Congress thought it could always rely on sentencing
discretion, it would not have created a criminal-history
requirement in the first instance. That requirement, by its terms,
confines such discretion. More specifically, it allows discretion
to operate only when a defendant’s record does not reach a certain
level of seriousness. On the Government’s reading, the paragraph
well performs that gatekeeping function, separating more serious
from less serious criminal histories. On Pulsifer’s reading, the
paragraph does not: As just shown, it allows and denies relief in
ways that do not correspond to the gravity of what a defendant has
previously done. The need for a judge to correct those
results—which Pulsifer admits—shows that his reading is wrong. Once
again, his construction of Paragraph (f )(1)—however
grammatical—makes a hash of the scheme Congress devised.

															B

															Pulsifer tries to tell a competing story
(which the dissent mostly adopts, see post, at 8–9, 18–19).
Even supposing the grammar of Paragraph (f )(1) is a wash,
Pulsifer contends that statutory context supports his view of what
that provision means by “and.” His argument invokes the
“presumption of consistent usage and the meaningful-variation
canon.” Brief for Pulsifer 22. Those are the terms often given to a
generally useful—but still “defeasible”—interpretive principle: In
a given statute, the same term usually has the same meaning and
different terms usually have different meanings. A. Scalia & B.
Garner, Reading Law 170–171 (2012). The principle is mostly applied
to terms with some heft and distinctiveness, whose use drafters are
likely to keep track of and standardize. See, e.g., IBP,
Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U.S.
21, 33–34 (2005) (construing the term “principal activity” in
the same way when used in neighboring provisions); Wisconsin
Central Ltd. v. United States, 585 U.S. 274, 279 (2018)
(holding that “money remuneration” must mean something different
from “all remuneration” when used in “companion” statutes (emphasis
deleted)). Pulsifer breaks new ground in applying the principle to
words as ubiquitous and (as shown above) sometimes
context-dependent as “and” and “or.” See supra, at 6–23. He
argues, more specifically, that another “and” plus an “or” in
Section 3553(f ) show that the “and” in Paragraph (f )(1)
must be read his way. But even accepting that a court can sometimes
demand harmonization of “and”s and “or”s, Pulsifer’s argument
fails.

															Take the other “and” first. As noted earlier,
the criminal-history requirement is only one of five conditions for
safety-valve relief set out in Section 3553(f ). See
supra, at 2–3. Those conditions appear in a list—Paragraphs
(f )(1) through (f )(5)—with an “and” linking them, just
as an “and” links Paragraph (f )(1)’s three subparagraphs. A
look at the appendix may be helpful here. See infra, at 29.
The stylized version of the list in Section 3553(f ) (with
content removed) goes as follows: The safety valve operates “if the
court finds” 1, 2, 3, 4, “and” 5.

															The problem for Pulsifer is that the meaning of
the “and” in Section 3553(f ) does not advance his reading of
Paragraph (f )(1). Everyone, including Pulsifer, agrees that
the “and” in Section 3553(f ) connects five requirements for
safety-valve relief, all of which a defendant must meet. In
Pulsifer’s view, the Government has to read Paragraph
(f )(1)’s “and” differently to make each one of its
subparagraphs disqualifying. See Brief for Pulsifer 21; Reply Brief
14–15. But that is just wrong. The “and” in Section 3553(f )
works identically to the “and” in the Government’s reading of
Paragraph (f )(1). Section 3553(f )’s “and” creates an
eligibility checklist. A defendant fulfills that provision’s
requirements if the court finds 1, finds 2, finds 3, finds 4, and
(finally) finds 5. So the “and” joins five individually necessary
conditions for relief. Likewise, the “and” in the Government’s
construction of Paragraph (f )(1) creates an eligibility
checklist. A defendant satisfies that paragraph’s requirements if
he does not have A, does not have B, and (finally) does not have C.
So again, the “and” joins several individually necessary conditions
for safety-valve relief. Everything is consistent, in meaning and
operation alike. It is actually Pulsifer who introduces dissonance
into the provision. As to the larger list, he acknowledges that a
defendant cannot get relief without checking off 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5
individually. But as to the smaller list, Pulsifer changes the
rule. Now a defendant need not satisfy A, B, and C individually.
Instead, he can get relief so long as he does not have A, B, and C
combined. In other words, in Pulsifer’s world, Section
3553(f ) is an eligibility checklist, but Paragraph
(f )(1) is not.

															Pulsifer’s deployment of another paragraph’s
“or” fares no better. Section 3553(f )(4) conditions
safety-valve relief on a finding that the “defendant was not an
organizer, leader, manager, or supervisor of others in the
offense.” See supra, at 2. Congress thus used an “or” to
signify that being any one of those things is disqualifying.
Invoking the meaningful-variation canon, Pulsifer argues that the
different term “and” in Paragraph (f )(1) must mean the
opposite: that only the combination of the listed things
disqualifies a defendant. See Brief for Pulsifer 21–22. Recall that
we have already rejected Pulsifer’s unadorned view that the word
“or” is needed to convey the Government’s reading of Paragraph
(f )(1). See supra, at 11–13. Pulsifer’s additional
reference to Paragraph (f )(4)’s “or” does not strengthen his
case. As we have shown throughout this opinion, conjunctions are
versatile words, which can work differently depending on context.
Here is yet another example. As another glance at the appendix will
confirm, the relevant clause in Paragraph (f )(4) is markedly
different in length and formatting from the material in Paragraph
(f )(1), naturally leading to different choices respecting the
use of conjunctions. And anyway, Congress drafted the current
versions of the paragraphs at different times—Paragraph
(f )(4) in 1994, Paragraph (f )(1) in 2018. See Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 108Stat. 1985; First
Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. 115–391, 132Stat. 5221. It would hardly
be surprising if 24 years later, Paragraph (f )(1)’s drafters
did not perfectly harmonize their conjunction usage with a
dissimilar-looking nearby paragraph. There can be few better
illustrations of the “defeasib[ility]” of the meaningful-variation
canon. Scalia, Reading Law, at 171.

															Finally, Pulsifer and the dissent make a
misguided argument about legislative purpose. As noted earlier,
Congress enacted the revised version of Paragraph (f )(1) as
part of the First Step Act, a significant sentencing reform law.
See supra, at 2–3. Pulsifer explains that the new provision
was meant “to make safety-valve relief more widely available.”
Brief for Pulsifer 22. And the dissent highlights how many more
defendants would get safety-valve relief under Pulsifer’s reading
than under the Government’s. See post, at 7; see also
post, at 1–7, 19. We do not doubt the points. But they do
not assist in interpreting the statutory text before us. Both views
of the paragraph—Pulsifer’s and the Government’s—significantly
widen the opportunity for safety-valve relief; recall that under
the prior provision, anything more than a single criminal-history
point precluded deviation from a mandatory minimum. See
supra, at 2–3. And Pulsifer’s interpretation is not better
just because it would go further than the Government’s. “[N]o law
pursues its . . . purpose[s] at all costs.” Luna
Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 598 U.S. 142, 150
(2023). So here, Congress did not eliminate but only curtailed
mandatory minimums—did not extend safety-valve relief to all
defendants, but only to some. And to determine the exact contours
of that class, we can do no better than examine Paragraph
(f )(1)’s text in context. For all the reasons given, that
scrutiny reveals that Pulsifer’s view goes too far.

															IV

															Yet Pulsifer (joined again by the dissent, see
post, at 31–32) asserts we are not done. At the least, he
claims, the meaning of the criminal-history requirement is
uncertain. And because it is uncertain, he must win. The rule of
lenity, he says, requires courts to read “ambiguous criminal
statutes in favor of liberty.” Brief for Pulsifer 47.

															The problem is that we do not view Paragraph
(f )(1) as genuinely ambiguous.[8] There are, to be sure, two grammatically permissible
readings of the statute when viewed in the abstract. It may be read
Pulsifer’s way—as stating that a defendant can get safety-valve
relief so long as he does not have the combination (A, B, and C).
Or it may be read the Government’s way—as stating that a defendant
can get safety-valve relief only if he does not have A, does not
have B, and does not have C. But the difficulty in choosing between
those two constructions falls away once we consider the content of
Subparagraphs A, B, and C: more than four criminal-history points
(excluding points from a one-point offense), a prior three-point
offense, and a prior two-point violent offense, all as determined
under the Sentencing Guidelines. Then we discover that Pulsifer’s
view creates glaring superfluity, whereas the Government’s view
does not. And we discover that only the Government’s view renders
the provision capable of sorting more serious from less serious
criminal records, consistent with both the statute’s and the
Guidelines’ designs. The two possible readings thus reduce to
one—leaving no role for lenity to play.

															In sum, Paragraph (f )(1)’s
criminal-history requirement sets out an eligibility checklist. A
defendant is eligible for safety-valve relief only if he satisfies
each of the paragraph’s three conditions. He cannot have more than
four criminal-history points. He cannot have a prior three-point
offense. And he cannot have a prior two-point violent offense.
Because Pulsifer has two prior three-point offenses totaling six
points, he is not eligible. It makes no difference that he does not
also have a prior two-point violent offense. Accordingly, we affirm
the judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.

															

															It is so ordered.

															

															APPENDIX

															

															§3553. Imposition of a sentence
.     .     .     .     .

															(f ) Limitation on Applicability of
Statutory Minimums in Certain Cases.—Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, in the case of an offense under section 401, 404,
or 406 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U. S. C. 841,
844, 846), section 1010 or 1013 of the Controlled Substances Import
and Export Act (21 U. S. C. 960, 963), or section 70503
or 70506 of title 46, the court shall impose a sentence pursuant to
guidelines promulgated by the United States Sentencing Commission
under section 994 of title 28 without regard to any statutory
minimum sentence, if the court finds at sentencing, after the
Government has been afforded the opportunity to make a
recommendation, that—

															(1) the defendant does not have—

															(A) more than 4 criminal history points,
excluding any criminal history points resulting from a 1-point
offense, as determined under the sentencing guidelines;

															(B) a prior 3-point offense, as determined under
the sentencing guidelines; and

															(C) a prior 2-point violent offense, as
determined under the sentencing guidelines;

															(2) the defendant did not use violence or
credible threats of violence or possess a firearm or other
dangerous weapon (or induce another participant to do so) in
connection with the offense;

															(3) the offense did not result in death or
serious bodily injury to any person;

															(4) the defendant was not an organizer, leader,
manager, or supervisor of others in the offense, as determined
under the sentencing guidelines and was not engaged in a continuing
criminal enterprise, as defined in section 408 of the Controlled
Substances Act; and

															(5) not later than the time of the sentencing
hearing, the defendant has truthfully provided to the Government
all information and evidence the defendant has concerning the
offense or offenses that were part of the same course of conduct or
of a common scheme or plan, but the fact that the defendant has no
relevant or useful other information to provide or that the
Government is already aware of the information shall not preclude a
determination by the court that the defendant has complied with
this requirement.

															Information disclosed by a defendant under this
subsection may not be used to enhance the sentence of the defendant
unless the information relates to a violent offense.

Notes
1
 Compare 39 F. 4th
1018 (CA8 2022) (case below) (holding that a defendant is eligible
for relief only if he does not have all three of the items listed);
United States v. Palomares, 52 F. 4th 640 (CA5
2022) (same); United States v. Haynes, 55 F. 4th
1075 (CA6 2022) (same); United States v. Pace, 48
F. 4th 741 (CA7 2022) (same), with United States v.
Jones, 60 F. 4th 230 (CA4 2023) (holding that a
defendant is eligible for relief so long as he does not have any
one of the items listed); United States v. Lopez, 998
F.3d 431 (CA9 2021) (same); United States v. Garcon,
54 F. 4th 1274 (CA11 2022) (en banc) (same).
2
 As later noted,
infra, at 15, the dissent ultimately comes around to the
view that the meaning of Paragraph (f )(1) depends on context,
see post, at 15–16.
3
 The dissent wrongly views
this ordinary feature of language as a kind of uncanny trick. To
understand a verb as applying to each of several ensuing terms (the
dissent says) is to choose verbal “gymnastics” over “natural”
meaning. Post, at 10. The dissent’s primary proof is that
such phrases can be rendered “with deleted words stricken and new
ones added in bold.” Ibid. Well, yes, but so what? It is
true, as the dissent might say, that “I bought (1) a novel, (2) a
memoir, and (3) a travel guide” is equivalent in meaning to “I
FONT bought FONT (1) bought a novel, (2)
bought a memoir, and (3) bought a travel guide.” Cf.
ibid. (similarly representing Paragraph (f)(1)). But
ordinary people still understand the verb to carry over to all the
books in the sentence. The strikeouts and boldface, far from
evidencing manipulation of meaning, just illustrate how expression
can naturally work. And that is so, contra the dissent
(post, at 13–14), when a sentence’s subject is singular
(rather than plural)—as shown by most of the sentences in the
paragraph above, many similar ones to come, see infra, at
10–11, and the vast number a reader can make up on her
own.
4
 So too, a manual of
contract drafting observes that “[t]he more natural meaning” of
“Acme shall not notify Able and Baker” is “Acme shall not notify
Able and shall not notify Baker,” not that he shall not notify the
two together, but may notify either one. K. Adams, A Manual of
Style for Contract Drafting §11.16, p. 212 (3d ed. 2013)
(emphasis deleted).
5
 That is not to say, of
course, that any negative statement involving the word “or” is
realistically capable of two meanings; the point is only that
context may drive such a statement in either direction. Consider
two examples. First, suppose a restaurant chef decides to buy
broccoli if his supplier “does not have spinach, eggplant, or
cauliflower.” That most likely means the chef will buy broccoli
only when the supplier is out of all three other vegetables, not
when he is out of just one. But second, suppose the same chef
typically places a food order if the restaurant “does not have
meat, produce, or bread.” That most likely means he’ll place an
order when the restaurant runs out of one of those foodstuffs, not
wait until it is lacking all three. The grammar in the two
statements is identical, but their most natural understanding is
not. Here, content drives meaning, so that in the one sentence, the
absence of three items—and in the other sentence, the absence of
one item—triggers the relevant purchase.
6
 The dissent tries to save
Pulsifer’s effort by offering an account of the Guidelines’
mechanics different from that given in the Guidelines themselves.
According to the dissent, the Guidelines “set forth a two-step
process” in which a judge first “assigns points to the defendant’s
prior offenses” under §4A1.1 and only then “computes the
defendant’s criminal history” score under §4A1.2. Post, at
22. So, the dissent claims, a court may first count two or three
points for an old conviction (under §4A1.1) and then exclude those
points from the computation of a history score (under §4A1.2). See
ibid. But in fact there are no “two steps” under the
Guidelines. As even the dissent concedes in one self-contradictory
moment, see ibid., there is only a single calculation, with
§4A1.2 providing the “[d]efinitions and [i]nstructions” for
§4A1.1’s “add[ing]” and “total[ing].” (Given that relationship, the
commentary explains, the two provisions “must be read together.”
USSG ch. 4, pt. A, intro.). And among §4A1.2’s “[i]nstructions” is
that old convictions simply “not [be] counted”—rather than, as the
dissent would have it, that they be first counted and then
uncounted. In other words, as §4A1.2’s commentary states, an old
conviction should “receive[ ] no criminal history points” in
the §4A1.1 calculation. USSG §4A1.2 comment., n. 3. So again:
Neither Pulsifer nor the dissent can transform an old conviction
into a two- or three-point offense.
7
 The dissent labors
unsuccessfully to find an explanation for this state of affairs.
Here is what it comes up with: Sometimes Congress opts for
“standardized formulas” or bright-line tests even though their
“over- and under-inclusi[on]” will produce statutory “anomalies.”
Post, at 27–28 (citing Ransom v. FIA Card
Services, N. A., 562 U.S.
61, 78 (2011)); see post, at 29. That is true enough,
but has no application here. Pulsifer’s view of the statute is no
more “standardized” than the Government’s—and so no more
predictable or administrable. The dissent thus remains without a
plausible, or even cogent, explanation for the failure of its
interpretation (and its interpretation alone) to perform the
statute’s gatekeeping role—in Pulsifer’s own words, to separate
defendants whose criminal history is more “suggestive of future
dangerousness” from defendants whose criminal history is less so.
Brief for Pulsifer 44.
8
 For that reason, we have
no need to address the Government’s argument that the rule of
lenity does not apply to Paragraph (f )(1) because it is not
properly considered a “penal law.” Brief for United States
46–47.


