::decision_cite:: 22-429
::decision_name::  Acheson Hotels, LLC v. Laufer
::decision_year:: 2023
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–429

															_________________

															ACHESON HOTELS, LLC v. DEBORAH
LAUFER

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the first circuit

															[December 5, 2023]

															

															Justice Barrett delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Deborah Laufer has sued hundreds of hotels whose
websites failed to state whether they have rooms accessible to the
disabled. As the sheer number of lawsuits suggests, she does not
focus her efforts on hotels where she has any thought of staying,
much less booking a room. Instead, Laufer systematically searches
the web to find hotels that fail to provide accessibility
information and sues to force compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 104Stat. 327, 42 U. S. C.
§12101 et seq. Ordinarily, the hotels settle her claims
and pay her attorney’s fees. But some have resisted, arguing that
Laufer is not injured by the absence of information about rooms she
has no plans to reserve. Only plaintiffs who allege a concrete
injury have standing to sue in federal court. Laufer, these hotels
have argued, is suing to enforce the law rather than to remedy her
own harms.

															Laufer has singlehandedly generated a circuit
split. The Second, Fifth, and Tenth Circuits have held that she
lacks standing; the First, Fourth, and Eleventh Circuits have held
that she has it. We took this case from the First Circuit to
resolve the split. 50 F. 4th 259 (CA1 2022); 598 U. S.
___ (2023). Though Acheson Hotels, LLC, filed the petition, Laufer
supported the grant.

															After we granted review, the case took an
unusual turn. In July, the United States District Court for the
District of Maryland suspended Laufer’s lawyer, Tristan Gillespie,
from the practice of law for defrauding hotels by lying in fee
petitions and during settlement negotiations. See Order in In re
Gillespie, No. 1:21–mc–14 (July 5, 2023), ECF Doc. 14. It based
the suspension on a report finding that Gillespie demanded $10,000
in attorney’s fees per case even though he used “boilerplate
complaints.” Report and Recommendation in No. 21–mc–14 (June 30,
2023), ECF Doc. 13, pp. 5, 26. In addition, Gillespie funneled
six-figure sums to the father of Laufer’s grandchild for
investigatory work that he never performed, raising the prospect
that either Gillespie or Laufer (or both) got a cut of the money.
Id., at 28, 30. Making matters still worse, the sanctions
order against Gillespie also implicated Laufer’s former counsel of
record before this Court, Thomas Bacon. Id., at
30–31.[1]

															Following these revelations, Laufer voluntarily
dismissed her pending suits with prejudice, including her complaint
against Acheson in the District of Maine. See Notice of Voluntary
Dismissal in No. 2:20–cv–00344 (July 20, 2023), ECF Doc. 45. She
then filed a suggestion of mootness in this Court. At this point,
Acheson had already filed its principal brief on the standing
issue, and we deferred a decision on mootness until after oral
argument.

															Laufer does not argue that we must
dismiss her suit for mootness. She acknowledges that we can address
jurisdictional issues in any order we choose, see Sinochem Int’l
Co. v. Malaysia Int’l Shipping Corp., 549 U.S.
422, 431 (2007), and so have authority to resolve the standing
issue. But mootness is easy and standing is hard, Laufer says. She
urges us to refrain from resolving a difficult question in a case
that is otherwise over.

															Acheson, on the other hand, stresses that the
difficult standing issue is the reason we took this case. Though
Laufer’s case is dead, the circuit split is very much alive. This
Court has received briefs and heard oral argument. For efficiency’s
sake, Acheson insists that we should settle the issue now rather
than repeating the work later. Moreover, Acheson warns that if we
dismiss this case for mootness, the standing issue might not come
back anytime soon. While Laufer has disavowed the intention to file
any more ADA tester suits, Tr. of Oral Arg. 70, others will file in
the circuits that sided with her, and hotels will settle, regarding
it as pointless to challenge circuit precedent in this Court. Why
would any hotel take a case this far, Acheson asks, if the
respondent can evade our review by abandoning a claim rather than
risking a loss?

															We are sensitive to Acheson’s concern about
litigants manipulating the jurisdiction of this Court. We are not
convinced, however, that Laufer abandoned her case in an effort to
evade our review. She voluntarily dismissed her pending ADA cases
after a lower court sanctioned her lawyer. She represented to this
Court that she will not file any others. Laufer’s case against
Acheson is moot, and we dismiss it on that ground. We emphasize,
however, that we might exercise our discretion differently in a
future case.

															*  *  *

															The judgment is vacated, and the case is
remanded to the United States Court of Appeals for the First
Circuit with instructions to dismiss the case as moot. See
United States v. Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U.S.
36 (1950). Justice Jackson objects to this disposition, urging
us to instead leave the First Circuit’s judgment in place. Our
Munsingwear practice is well settled. See, e.g.,
United States v. Microsoft Corp., 584 U.S. 236, 240
(2018) (per curiam); Great Western Sugar Co. v.
Nelson, 442 U.S.
92, 93–94 (1979) (per curiam); Duke Power Co. v.
Greenwood County, 299 U.S.
259, 267 (1936) (per curiam); see also S. Shapiro, K.
Geller, T. Bishop, E. Hartnett, & D. Himmelfarb, Supreme Court
Practice §19.5 (11th ed. 2019). We decline Justice Jackson’s
invitation to reconsider it.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
On November 14th, the Fourth
Circuit vacated and remanded the suspension order, holding that the
district court gave Gillespie insufficient notice that it might
sanction him not only for dishonesty to opposing counsel, but also
for failing to communicate with his clients. In re
Gillespie, No. 23–1819 (CA4 Nov. 14, 2023). Disciplinary
proceedings remain pending in the District Court.


