::decision_cite:: 22-451
::decision_name::  Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 22–451 and 22–1219

															_________________

															LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES, et al.,
PETITIONERS

															22–451v.

															GINA RAIMONDO, SECRETARY OF COMMERCE,
et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															

															RELENTLESS, INC., et al.,
PETITIONERS

															22–1219v.

															DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the first circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															

															Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Sotomayor and
Justice Jackson join,[1]*
dissenting.

															For 40 years, Chevron U. S. A.
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,
467 U.S.
837 (1984), has served as a cornerstone of administrative law,
allocating responsibility for statutory construction between courts
and agencies. Under Chevron, a court uses all its normal
interpretive tools to determine whether Congress has spoken to an
issue. If the court finds Congress has done so, that is the end of
the matter; the agency’s views make no difference. But if the court
finds, at the end of its interpretive work, that Congress has left
an ambiguity or gap, then a choice must be made. Who should give
content to a statute when Congress’s instructions have run out?
Should it be a court? Or should it be the agency Congress has
charged with administering the statute? The answer Chevron
gives is that it should usually be the agency, within the bounds of
reasonableness. That rule has formed the backdrop against which
Congress, courts, and agencies—as well as regulated parties and the
public—all have operated for decades. It has been applied in
thousands of judicial decisions. It has become part of the warp and
woof of modern government, supporting regulatory efforts of all
kinds—to name a few, keeping air and water clean, food and drugs
safe, and financial markets honest.

															And the rule is right. This Court has long
understood Chevron deference to reflect what Congress would
want, and so to be rooted in a presumption of legislative intent.
Congress knows that it does not—in fact cannot—write perfectly
complete regulatory statutes. It knows that those statutes will
inevitably contain ambiguities that some other actor will have to
resolve, and gaps that some other actor will have to fill. And it
would usually prefer that actor to be the responsible agency, not a
court. Some interpretive issues arising in the regulatory context
involve scientific or technical subject matter. Agencies have
expertise in those areas; courts do not. Some demand a detailed
understanding of complex and interdependent regulatory programs.
Agencies know those programs inside-out; again, courts do not. And
some present policy choices, including trade-offs between competing
goods. Agencies report to a President, who in turn answers to the
public for his policy calls; courts have no such accountability and
no proper basis for making policy. And of course Congress has
conferred on that expert, experienced, and politically accountable
agency the authority to administer—to make rules about and
otherwise implement—the statute giving rise to the ambiguity or
gap. Put all that together and deference to the agency is the
almost obvious choice, based on an implicit congressional
delegation of interpretive authority. We defer, the Court has
explained, “because of a presumption that Congress” would have
“desired the agency (rather than the courts)” to exercise “whatever
degree of discretion” the statute allows. Smiley v.
Citibank (South Dakota), N. A., 517
U.S. 735, 740–741 (1996).

															Today, the Court flips the script: It is now
“the courts (rather than the agency)” that will wield power when
Congress has left an area of interpretive discretion. A rule of
judicial humility gives way to a rule of judicial hubris. In recent
years, this Court has too often taken for itself decision-making
authority Congress assigned to agencies. The Court has substituted
its own judgment on workplace health for that of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration; its own judgment on climate
change for that of the Environmental Protection Agency; and its own
judgment on student loans for that of the Department of Education.
See, e.g., National Federation of Independent
Business v. OSHA, 595 U.S. 109 (2022); West
Virginia v. EPA, 597 U.S. 697 (2022); Biden v.
Nebraska, 600 U.S. 477 (2023). But evidently that was, for
this Court, all too piecemeal. In one fell swoop, the majority
today gives itself exclusive power over every open issue—no matter
how expertise-driven or policy-laden—involving the meaning of
regulatory law. As if it did not have enough on its plate, the
majority turns itself into the country’s administrative czar. It
defends that move as one (suddenly) required by the (nearly
80-year-old) Administrative Procedure Act. But the Act makes no
such demand. Today’s decision is not one Congress directed. It is
entirely the majority’s choice.

															And the majority cannot destroy one doctrine of
judicial humility without making a laughing-stock of a second. (If
opinions had titles, a good candidate for today’s would be Hubris
Squared.) Stare decisis is, among other things, a way to
remind judges that wisdom often lies in what prior judges have
done. It is a brake on the urge to convert “every new judge’s
opinion” into a new legal rule or regime. Dobbs v.
Jackson Women’s Health Organization, 597 U.S. 215, 388
(2022) (joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, JJ.,
dissenting) (quoting 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of
England 69 (7th ed. 1775)). Chevron is entrenched precedent,
entitled to the protection of stare decisis, as even the
majority acknowledges. In fact, Chevron is entitled to the
supercharged version of that doctrine because Congress could always
overrule the decision, and because so many governmental and private
actors have relied on it for so long. Because that is so, the
majority needs a “particularly special justification” for its
action. Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U.S. 558, 588 (2019)
(opinion of the Court). But the majority has nothing that would
qualify. It barely tries to advance the usual factors this Court
invokes for overruling precedent. Its justification comes down, in
the end, to this: Courts must have more say over regulation—over
the provision of health care, the protection of the environment,
the safety of consumer products, the efficacy of transportation
systems, and so on. A longstanding precedent at the crux of
administrative governance thus falls victim to a bald assertion of
judicial authority. The majority disdains restraint, and grasps for
power.

															I

															Begin with the problem that gave rise to
Chevron (and also to its older precursors): The regulatory
statutes Congress passes often contain ambiguities and gaps.
Sometimes they are intentional. Perhaps Congress “consciously
desired” the administering agency to fill in aspects of the
legislative scheme, believing that regulatory experts would be “in
a better position” than legislators to do so. Chevron, 467
U. S., at 865. Or “perhaps Congress was unable to forge a
coalition on either side” of a question, and the contending parties
“decided to take their chances with” the agency’s resolution.
Ibid. Sometimes, though, the gaps or ambiguities are what
might be thought of as predictable accidents. They may be the
result of sloppy drafting, a not infrequent legislative occurrence.
Or they may arise from the well-known limits of language or
foresight. Accord, ante, at 7, 22. “The subject matter” of a
statutory provision may be too “specialized and varying” to
“capture in its every detail.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 566
(plurality opinion). Or the provision may give rise, years or
decades down the road, to an issue the enacting Congress could not
have anticipated. Whichever the case—whatever the reason—the result
is to create uncertainty about some aspect of a provision’s
meaning.

															Consider a few examples from the caselaw. They
will help show what a typical Chevron question looks like—or
really, what a typical Chevron question is. Because
when choosing whether to send some class of questions mainly to a
court, or mainly to an agency, abstract analysis can only go so
far; indeed, it may obscure what matters most. So I begin with the
concrete:

															Under the Public Health Service Act, the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates “biological product[s],”
including “protein[s].” 42 U. S. C. §262(i)(1). When does
an alpha amino acid polymer qualify as such a “protein”? Must it
have a specific, defined sequence of amino acids? See Teva
Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. v. FDA, 514 F. Supp. 3d 66,
79–80, 93–106 (DC 2020).

															Under the Endangered Species Act, the Fish and
Wildlife Service must designate endangered “vertebrate fish or
wildlife” species, including “distinct population segment[s]” of
those species. 16 U. S. C. §1532(16); see §1533. What
makes one population segment “distinct” from another? Must the
Service treat the Washington State population of western gray
squirrels as “distinct”

															00because it is geographically separated from
other western gray squirrels? Or can the Service take into account
that the genetic makeup of the Washington population does not
differ markedly from the rest? See Northwest Ecosystem
Alliance v. United States Fish and Wildlife Serv., 475
F.3d 1136, 1140–1145, 1149 (CA9 2007).

															Under the Medicare program, reimbursements to
hospitals are adjusted to reflect “differences in hospital wage
levels” across “geographic area[s].” 42 U. S. C.
§1395ww(d)(3)(E)(i). How should the Department of Health and Human
Services measure a “geographic area”? By city? By county? By
metropolitan area? See Bellevue Hospital Center v.
Leavitt, 
443 F.3d 163, 174–176 (CA2 2006).

															Congress directed the Department of the
Interior and the Federal Aviation Administration to reduce noise
from aircraft flying over Grand Canyon National Park—specifically,
to “provide for substantial restoration of the natural quiet.”
§3(b)(1), 101 Stat. 676; see §3(b)(2). How much noise is consistent
with “the natural quiet”? And how much of the park, for how many
hours a day, must be that quiet for the “substantial restoration”
requirement to be met? See Grand Canyon Air Tour Coalition
v. FAA, 
154 F.3d 455, 466–467, 474–475 (CADC 1998).

															Or take Chevron itself. In amendments to
the Clean Air Act, Congress told States to require permits for
modifying or constructing “stationary sources” of air pollution. 42
U. S. C. §7502(c)(5). Does the term “stationary
source[ ]” refer to each pollution-emitting piece of equipment
within a plant? Or does it refer to the entire plant, and thus
allow escape from the permitting requirement when increased
emissions from one piece of equipment are offset by reductions from
another? See 467 U. S., at 857, 859.

															In each case, a statutory phrase has more than
one reasonable reading. And Congress has not chosen among them: It
has not, in any real-world sense, “fixed” the “single, best
meaning” at “the time of enactment” (to use the majority’s phrase).
Ante, at 22. A question thus arises: Who decides which of
the possible readings should govern?

															This Court has long thought that the choice
should usually fall to agencies, with courts broadly deferring to
their judgments. For the last 40 years, that doctrine has gone by
the name of Chevron deference, after the 1984 decision that
formalized and canonized it. In Chevron, the Court set out a
simple two-part framework for reviewing an agency’s interpretation
of a statute that it administers. First, the reviewing court must
determine whether Congress has “directly spoken to the precise
question at issue.” 467 U. S., at 842. That inquiry is
rigorous: A court must exhaust all the “traditional tools of
statutory construction” to divine statutory meaning. Id., at
843, n. 9. And when it can find that meaning—a “single right
answer”—that is “the end of the matter”: The court cannot defer
because it “must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent
of Congress.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 575 (opinion of the
Court); Chevron, 467 U. S., at 842–843. But if the
court, after using its whole legal toolkit, concludes that “the
statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue”
in dispute—for any of the not-uncommon reasons discussed above—then
the court must cede the primary interpretive role. Ibid.;
see supra, at 4–5. At that second step, the court asks only
whether the agency construction is within the sphere of
“reasonable” readings. Chevron, 467 U. S., at 844. If
it is, the agency’s interpretation of the statute that it every day
implements will control.

															That rule, the Court has long explained, rests
on a presumption about legislative intent—about what Congress wants
when a statute it has charged an agency with implementing contains
an ambiguity or a gap. See id., at 843–845; Smiley,
517 U. S., at 740–741. An enacting Congress, as noted above,
knows those uncertainties will arise, even if it does not know what
they will turn out to be. See supra, at 4–5. And every once
in a while, Congress provides an explicit instruction for dealing
with that contingency—assigning primary responsibility to the
courts, or else to an agency. But much more often, Congress does
not say. Thus arises the need for a presumption—really, a default
rule—for what should happen in that event. Does a statutory silence
or ambiguity then go to a court for resolution? Or to an agency?
This Court has long thought Congress would choose an agency, with
courts serving only as a backstop to make sure the agency makes a
reasonable choice among the possible readings. Or said otherwise,
Congress would select the agency it has put in control of a
regulatory scheme to exercise the “degree of discretion” that the
statute’s lack of clarity or completeness allows. Smiley,
517 U. S., at 741. Of course, Congress can always refute that
presumptive choice—can say that, really, it would prefer courts to
wield that discretionary power. But until then, the presumption
cuts in the agency’s favor.[2]
The next question is why.

															For one, because agencies often know things
about a statute’s subject matter that courts could not hope to. The
point is especially stark when the statute is of a “scientific or
technical nature.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 571 (plurality
opinion). Agencies are staffed with “experts in the field” who can
bring their training and knowledge to bear on open statutory
questions. Chevron, 467 U. S., at 865. Consider, for
example, the first bulleted case above. When does an alpha amino
acid polymer qualify as a “protein”? See supra, at 5. I
don’t know many judges who would feel confident resolving that
issue. (First question: What even is an alpha amino acid
polymer?) But the FDA likely has scores of scientists on staff who
can think intelligently about it, maybe collaborate with each other
on its finer points, and arrive at a sensible answer. Or take the
perhaps more accessible-sounding second case, involving the
Endangered Species Act. See supra, at 5–6. Deciding when one
squirrel population is “distinct” from another (and thus warrants
protection) requires knowing about species more than it does
consulting a dictionary. How much variation of what
kind—geographic, genetic, morphological, or behavioral—should be
required? A court could, if forced to, muddle through that issue
and announce a result. But wouldn’t the Fish and Wildlife Service,
with all its specialized expertise, do a better job of the task—of
saying what, in the context of species protection, the open-ended
term “distinct” means? One idea behind the Chevron
presumption is that Congress—the same Congress that charged the
Service with implementing the Act—would answer that question with a
resounding “yes.”

															A second idea is that Congress would value the
agency’s experience with how a complex regulatory regime functions,
and with what is needed to make it effective. Let’s stick with
squirrels for a moment, except broaden the lens. In construing a
term like “distinct” in a case about squirrels, the Service likely
would benefit from its “historical familiarity” with how the term
has covered the population segments of other species. Martin
v. Occupational Safety and Health Review Comm’n, 499 U.S.
144, 153 (1991); see, e.g., Center for Biological
Diversity v. Zinke, 900 F.3d 1053, 1060–1062 (CA9 2018)
(arctic grayling); Center for Biological Diversity v.
Zinke, 868 F.3d 1054, 1056 (CA9 2017) (desert eagle). Just
as a common-law court makes better decisions as it sees multiple
variations on a theme, an agency’s construction of a statutory term
benefits from its unique exposure to all the related ways the term
comes into play. Or consider, for another way regulatory
familiarity matters, the example about adjusting Medicare
reimbursement for geographic wage differences. See supra, at
6. According to a dictionary, the term “geographic area” could be
as large as a multi-state region or as small as a census tract. How
to choose? It would make sense to gather hard information about
what reimbursement levels each approach will produce, to explore
the ease of administering each on a nationwide basis, to survey how
regulators have dealt with similar questions in the past, and to
confer with the hospitals themselves about what makes sense. See
Kisor, 588 U. S., at 571 (plurality opinion) (noting
that agencies are able to “conduct factual investigations” and
“consult with affected parties”). Congress knows the Department of
Health and Human Services can do all those things—and that courts
cannot.

															Still more, Chevron’s presumption
reflects that resolving statutory ambiguities, as Congress well
knows, is “often more a question of policy than of law.”
Pauley v. BethEnergy Mines, Inc., 501 U.S.
680, 696 (1991). The task is less one of construing a text than
of balancing competing goals and values. Consider the statutory
directive to achieve “substantial restoration of the [Grand
Canyon’s] natural quiet.” See supra, at 6. Someone is going
to have to decide exactly what that statute means for air traffic
over the canyon. How many flights, in what places and at what
times, are consistent with restoring enough natural quiet on the
ground? That is a policy trade-off of a kind familiar to
agencies—but peculiarly unsuited to judges. Or consider
Chevron itself. As the Court there understood, the choice
between defining a “stationary source” as a whole plant or as a
pollution-emitting device is a choice about how to “reconcile” two
“manifestly competing interests.” 467 U. S., at 865. The
plantwide definition relaxes the permitting requirement in the
interest of promoting economic growth; the device-specific
definition strengthens that requirement to better reduce air
pollution. See id., at 851, 863, 866. Again, that is a
choice a judge should not be making, but one an agency properly
can. Agencies are “subject to the supervision of the President, who
in turn answers to the public.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at
571–572 (plurality opinion). So when faced with a statutory
ambiguity, “an agency to which Congress has delegated policymaking
responsibilities” may rely on an accountable actor’s “views of wise
policy to inform its judgments.” Chevron, 467 U. S., at
865.

															None of this is to say that deference to
agencies is always appropriate. The Court over time has fine-tuned
the Chevron regime to deny deference in classes of cases in
which Congress has no reason to prefer an agency to a court. The
majority treats those “refinements” as a flaw in the scheme,
ante, at 27, but they are anything but. Consider the rule
that an agency gets no deference when construing a statute it is
not responsible for administering. See Epic Systems Corp. v.
Lewis, 584 U.S. 497, 519–520 (2018). Well, of course not—if
Congress has not put an agency in charge of implementing a statute,
Congress would not have given the agency a special role in its
construction. Or take the rule that an agency will not receive
deference if it has reached its decision without using—or without
using properly—its rulemaking or adjudicatory authority. See
United States v. Mead Corp., 533
U.S. 218, 226–227 (2001); Encino Motorcars, LLC v.
Navarro, 579 U.S. 211, 220 (2016). Again, that should not be
surprising: Congress expects that authoritative pronouncements on a
law’s meaning will come from the procedures it has enacted to
foster “fairness and deliberation” in agency decision-making.
Mead, 533 U. S., at 230. Or finally, think of the
“extraordinary cases” involving questions of vast “economic and
political significance” in which the Court has declined to defer.
King v. Burwell, 576 U.S.
473, 485–486 (2015). The theory is that Congress would not have
left matters of such import to an agency, but would instead have
insisted on maintaining control. So the Chevron refinements
proceed from the same place as the original doctrine. Taken
together, they give interpretive primacy to the agency when—but
only when—it is acting, as Congress specified, in the heartland of
its delegated authority.

															That carefully calibrated framework “reflects a
sensitivity to the proper roles of the political and judicial
branches.” Pauley, 501 U. S., at 696. Where Congress
has spoken, Congress has spoken; only its judgments matter. And
courts alone determine when that has happened: Using all their
normal interpretive tools, they decide whether Congress has
addressed a given issue. But when courts have decided that Congress
has not done so, a choice arises. Absent a legislative directive,
either the administering agency or a court must take the lead. And
the matter is more fit for the agency. The decision is likely to
involve the agency’s subject-matter expertise; to fall within its
sphere of regulatory experience; and to involve policy choices,
including cost-benefit assessments and trade-offs between
conflicting values. So a court without relevant expertise or
experience, and without warrant to make policy calls, appropriately
steps back. The court still has a role to play: It polices the
agency to ensure that it acts within the zone of reasonable
options. But the court does not insert itself into an agency’s
expertise-driven, policy-laden functions. That is the arrangement
best suited to keep every actor in its proper lane. And it is the
one best suited to ensure that Congress’s statutes work in the way
Congress intended.

															The majority makes two points in reply, neither
convincing. First, it insists that “agencies have no special
competence” in filling gaps or resolving ambiguities in regulatory
statutes; rather, “[c]ourts do.” Ante, at 23. Score one for
self-confidence; maybe not so high for self-reflection or
-knowledge. Of course courts often construe legal texts, hopefully
well. And Chevron’s first step takes full advantage of that
talent: There, a court tries to divine what Congress meant, even in
the most complicated or abstruse statutory schemes. The deference
comes in only if the court cannot do so—if the court must admit
that standard legal tools will not avail to fill a statutory
silence or give content to an ambiguous term. That is when the
issues look like the ones I started off with: When does an alpha
amino acid polymer qualify as a “protein”? How distinct is
“distinct” for squirrel populations? What size “geographic area”
will ensure appropriate hospital reimbursement? As between two
equally feasible understandings of “stationary source,” should one
choose the one more protective of the environment or the one more
favorable to economic growth? The idea that courts have “special
competence” in deciding such questions whereas agencies have
“no[ne]” is, if I may say, malarkey. Answering those questions
right does not mainly demand the interpretive skills courts
possess. Instead, it demands one or more of: subject-matter
expertise, long engagement with a regulatory scheme, and policy
choice. It is courts (not agencies) that “have no special
competence”—or even legitimacy—when those are the things a decision
calls for.

															Second, the majority complains that an ambiguity
or gap does not “necessarily reflect a congressional intent that an
agency” should have primary interpretive authority. Ante, at
22. On that score, I’ll agree with the premise: It doesn’t
“necessarily” do so. Chevron is built on a
presumption. The decision does not maintain that Congress in
every case wants the agency, rather than a court, to fill in gaps.
The decision maintains that when Congress does not expressly pick
one or the other, we need a default rule; and the best default
rule—agency or court?—is the one we think Congress would generally
want. As to why Congress would generally want the agency:
The answer lies in everything said above about Congress’s
delegation of regulatory power to the agency and the agency’s
special competencies. See supra, at 9–11. The majority
appears to think it is a showstopping rejoinder to note that many
statutory gaps and ambiguities are “unintentional.” Ante, at
22. But to begin, many are not; the ratio between the two is
uncertain. See supra, at 4–5. And to end, why should that
matter in any event? Congress may not have deliberately introduced
a gap or ambiguity into the statute; but it knows that pretty much
everything it drafts will someday be found to contain such a
“flaw.” Given that knowledge, Chevron asks, what would
Congress want? The presumed answer is again the same (for the same
reasons): The agency. And as with any default rule, if Congress
decides otherwise, all it need do is say.

															In that respect, the proof really is in the
pudding: Congress basically never says otherwise, suggesting that
Chevron chose the presumption aligning with legislative
intent (or, in the majority’s words, “approximat[ing] reality,”
ante, at 22). Over the last four decades, Congress has
authorized or reauthorized hundreds of statutes. The drafters of
those statutes knew all about Chevron. See A. Gluck & L.
Bressman, Statutory Interpretation From the Inside—An Empirical
Study of Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons: Part
I, 65 Stan. L. Rev. 901, 928 (fig. 2), 994 (2013). So if they had
wanted a different assignment of interpretive responsibility, they
would have inserted a provision to that effect. With just a pair of
exceptions I know of, they did not. See 12 U. S. C.
§25b(b)(5)(A) (exception #1); 15 U. S. C. §8302(c)(3)(A)
(exception #2). Similarly, Congress has declined to enact proposed
legislation that would abolish Chevron across the board. See
S. 909, 116th Cong., 1st Sess., §2 (2019) (still a bill, not a
law); H. R. 5, 115th Cong., 1st Sess., §202 (2017) (same). So to
the extent the majority is worried that the Chevron
presumption is “fiction[al],” ante, at 26—as all legal
presumptions in some sense are—it has gotten less and less so every
day for 40 years. The congressional reaction shows as well as
anything could that the Chevron Court read Congress
right.

															II

															The majority’s principal arguments are in a
different vein. Around 80 years after the APA was enacted and 40
years after Chevron, the majority has decided that the
former precludes the latter. The APA’s Section 706, the majority
says, “makes clear” that agency interpretations of statutes “are
not entitled to deference.” Ante, at 14–15 (emphasis
in original). And that provision, the majority continues, codified
the contemporaneous law, which likewise did not allow for
deference. See ante, at 9–13, 15–16. But neither the APA nor
the pre-APA state of the law does the work that the majority
claims. Both are perfectly compatible with Chevron
deference.

															Section 706, enacted with the rest of the APA in
1946, provides for judicial review of agency action. It states: “To
the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the reviewing
court shall decide all relevant questions of law, interpret
constitutional and statutory provisions, and determine the meaning
or applicability of the terms of an agency action.” 5
U. S. C. §706.

															That text, contra the majority, “does not
resolve the Chevron question.” C. Sunstein, Chevron
As Law, 107 Geo. L. J. 1613, 1642 (2019) (Sunstein). Or said a bit
differently, Section 706 is “generally indeterminate” on the matter
of deference. A. Vermeule, Judging Under Uncertainty 207 (2006)
(Vermeule). The majority highlights the phrase “decide all relevant
questions of law” (italicizing the “all”), and notes that the
provision “prescribes no deferential standard” for answering those
questions. Ante, at 14. But just as the provision does not
prescribe a deferential standard of review, so too it does not
prescribe a de novo standard of review (in which the
court starts from scratch, without giving deference). In point of
fact, Section 706 does not specify any standard of review
for construing statutes. See Kisor, 588 U. S., at 581
(plurality opinion). And when a court uses a deferential
standard—here, by deciding whether an agency reading is
reasonable—it just as much “decide[s]” a “relevant question[ ]
of law” as when it uses a de novo standard. §706. The
deferring court then conforms to Section 706 “by determining
whether the agency has stayed within the bounds of its assigned
discretion—that is, whether the agency has construed [the statute
it administers] reasonably.” J. Manning, Chevron and the
Reasonable Legislator, 128 Harv. L. Rev. 457, 459 (2014); see
Arlington v. FCC, 569 U.S.
290, 317 (2013) (Roberts, C. J., dissenting) (“We do not ignore
[Section 706’s] command when we afford an agency’s statutory
interpretation Chevron deference; we respect it”).[3]

															Section 706’s references to standards of review
in other contexts only further undercut the majority’s argument.
The majority notes that Section 706 requires deferential review for
agency fact-finding and policy-making (under, respectively, a
substantial-evidence standard and an arbitrary-and-capricious
standard). See ante, at 14. Congress, the majority claims,
“surely would have articulated a similarly deferential standard
applicable to questions of law had it intended to depart” from
de novo review. Ibid. Surely? In another part of
Section 706, Congress explicitly referred to de novo
review. §706(2)(F). With all those references to standards of
review—both deferential and not—running around Section 706, what is
“telling” (ante, at 14) is the absence of any standard for
reviewing an agency’s statutory constructions. That silence left
the matter, as noted above, “generally indeterminate”: Section 706
neither mandates nor forbids Chevron-style deference.
Vermeule 207.[4]

															And contra the majority, most “respected
commentators” understood Section 706 in that way—as allowing, even
if not requiring, deference. Ante, at 16. The finest
administrative law scholars of the time (call them that
generation’s Manning, Sunstein, and Vermeule) certainly did.
Professor Louis Jaffe described something very like the
Chevron two-step as the preferred method of reviewing agency
interpretations under the APA. A court, he said, first “must decide
as a ‘question of law’ whether there is ‘discretion’ in the
premises.” Judicial Control of Administrative Action 570 (1965).
That is akin to step 1: Did Congress speak to the issue, or did it
leave openness? And if the latter, Jaffe continued, the agency’s
view “if ‘reasonable’ is free of control.” Ibid. That of
course looks like step 2: defer if reasonable. And just in case
that description was too complicated, Jaffe conveyed his main point
this way: The argument that courts “must decide all questions of
law”—as if there were no agency in the picture—“is, in my opinion,
unsound.” Id., at 569. Similarly, Professor Kenneth Culp
Davis, author of the then-preeminent treatise on administrative
law, noted with approval that “reasonableness” review of agency
interpretations—in which courts “refused to substitute
judgment”—had “survived the APA.” Administrative Law 880, 883, 885
(1951) (Davis). Other contemporaneous scholars and experts agreed.
See R. Levin, The APA and the Assault on Deference, 106 Minn. L.
Rev. 125, 181–183 (2021) (Levin) (listing many of them). They did
not see in their own time what the majority finds there
today.[5]

															Nor, evidently, did the Supreme Court. In the
years after the APA was enacted, the Court “never indicated that
section 706 rejected the idea that courts might defer to agency
interpretations of law.” Sunstein 1654. Indeed, not a single
Justice so much as floated that view of the APA. To the contrary,
the Court issued a number of decisions in those years deferring to
an agency’s statutory interpretation. See, e.g.,
Unemployment Compensation Comm’n of Alaska v. Aragon,
329 U.S.
143, 153–154 (1946); NLRB v. E. C. Atkins &
Co., 331 U.S.
398, 403 (1947); Cardillo v. Liberty Mut. Ins.
Co., 330 U.S.
469, 478–479 (1947). And that continued right up until
Chevron. See, e.g., Mitchell v. Budd,
350 U.S.
473, 480 (1956); Zenith Radio Corp. v. United
States, 437 U.S.
443, 450 (1978). To be clear: Deference in those years was not
always given to interpretations that would receive it under
Chevron. The practice then was more inconsistent and less
fully elaborated than it later became. The point here is only that
the Court came nowhere close to accepting the majority’s view of
the APA. Take the language from Section 706 that the majority most
relies on: “decide all relevant questions of law.” See ante,
at 14. In the decade after the APA’s enactment, those words were
used only four times in Supreme Court opinions (all in
footnotes)—and never to suggest that courts could not defer to
agency interpretations. See Sunstein 1656.

															The majority’s view of Section 706 likewise gets
no support from how judicial review operated in the years leading
up to the APA. That prior history matters: As the majority
recognizes, Section 706 was generally understood to
“restate[ ] the present law as to the scope of judicial
review.” Dept. of Justice, Attorney General’s Manual on the
Administrative Procedure Act 108 (1947); ante, at 15–16. The
problem for the majority is that in the years preceding the APA,
courts became ever more deferential to agencies. New Deal
administrative programs had by that point come into their own. And
this Court and others, in a fairly short time, had abandoned their
initial resistance and gotten on board. Justice Breyer, wearing his
administrative-law-scholar hat, characterized the pre-APA period
this way: “[J]udicial review of administrative action was
curtailed, and particular agency decisions were frequently
sustained with judicial obeisance to the mysteries of
administrative expertise.” S. Breyer et al., Administrative
Law and Regulatory Policy 21 (7th ed. 2011). And that description
extends to review of an agency’s statutory constructions. An
influential study of administrative practice, published five years
before the APA’s enactment, described the state of play: Judicial
“review may, in some instances at least, be limited to the inquiry
whether the administrative construction is a permissible one.”
Final Report of Attorney General’s Committee on Administrative
Procedure (1941), reprinted in Administrative Procedure in
Government Agencies, S. Doc. No. 8, 77th Cong., 1st Sess., 78
(1941). Or again: “[W]here the statute is reasonably susceptible of
more than one interpretation, the court may accept that of the
administrative body.” Id., at 90–91.[6]

															Two prominent Supreme Court decisions of the
1940s put those principles into action. Gray v.
Powell, 314 U.S.
402 (1941), was then widely understood as “the leading case” on
review of agency interpretations. Davis 882; see ibid.
(noting that it “establish[ed] what is known as ‘the doctrine of
Gray v. Powell’ ”). There, the Court deferred to an agency
construction of the term “producer” as used in a statutory
exemption from price controls. Congress, the Court explained, had
committed the scope of the exemption to the agency because its
“experience in [the] field gave promise of a better informed, more
equitable, adjustment of the conflicting interests.” Gray,
314 U. S., at 412. Accordingly, the Court concluded that it
was “not the province of a court” to “substitute its judgment” for
the agency’s. Ibid. Three years later, the Court decided
NLRB v. Hearst Publications, Inc., 322 U.S.
111 (1944), another acknowledged “leading case.” Davis 882; see
id., at 884. The Court again deferred, this time to an
agency’s construction of the term “employee” in the National Labor
Relations Act. The scope of that term, the Court explained,
“belong[ed] to” the agency to answer based on its “[e]veryday
experience in the administration of the statute.” Hearst,
322 U. S., at 130. The Court therefore “limited” its review to
whether the agency’s reading had “warrant in the record and a
reasonable basis in law.” Id., at 131.[7] Recall here that even the majority accepts that
Section 706 was meant to “restate[ ] the present law” as to
judicial review. See ante, at 15–16; supra, at 19–20.
Well then? It sure would seem that the provision allows a deference
regime.

															The majority has no way around those two
noteworthy decisions. It first appears to distinguish between “pure
legal question[s]” and the so-called mixed questions in Gray
and Hearst, involving the application of a legal standard to
a set of facts. Ante, at 11. If in drawing that distinction,
the majority intends to confine its holding to the pure type of
legal issue—thus enabling courts to defer when law and facts are
entwined—I’d be glad. But I suspect the majority has no such
intent, because that approach would preserve Chevron in a
substantial part of its current domain. Cf. Wilkinson v.
Garland, 601 U.S. 209, 230 (2024) (Alito, J., dissenting)
(noting, in the immigration context, that the universe of mixed
questions swamps that of pure legal ones). It is frequently in the
consideration of mixed questions that the scope of statutory terms
is established and their meaning defined. See H. Monaghan,
Marbury and the Administrative State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1,
29 (1983) (“Administrative application of law is administrative
formulation of law whenever it involves elaboration of the
statutory norm”). How does a statutory interpreter decide, as in
Hearst, what an “employee” is? In large part through cases
asking whether the term covers people performing specific jobs,
like (in that case) “newsboys.” 322 U. S., at 120. Or consider
one of the examples I offered above. How does an interpreter decide
when one population segment of a species is “distinct” from
another? Often by considering that requirement with respect to
particular species, like western gray squirrels. So the distinction
the majority offers makes no real-world (or even theoretical)
sense. If the Hearst Court was deferring to an agency on
whether the term “employee” covered newsboys, it was deferring to
the agency on the scope and meaning of the term “employee.”

															The majority’s next rejoinder—that “the Court
was far from consistent” in deferring—falls equally flat.
Ante, at 12. I am perfectly ready to acknowledge that in the
pre-APA period, a deference regime had not yet taken complete hold.
I’ll go even further: Let’s assume that deference was then an
on-again, off-again function (as the majority seems to suggest, see
ante, at 11–12, and 13, n. 3). Even on that assumption,
the majority’s main argument—that Section 706 prohibited
deferential review—collapses. Once again, the majority agrees that
Section 706 was not meant to change the then-prevailing law. See
ante, at 15–16. And even if inconsistent, that law cannot
possibly be thought to have prohibited deference. Or
otherwise said: “If Section 706 did not change the law of judicial
review (as we have long recognized), then it did not proscribe a
deferential standard then known and in use.” Kisor, 588
U. S., at 583 (plurality opinion).

															The majority’s whole argument for overturning
Chevron relies on Section 706. But the text of Section 706
does not support that result. And neither does the contemporaneous
practice, which that text was supposed to reflect. So today’s
decision has no basis in the only law the majority deems relevant.
It is grounded on air.

															III

															And still there is worse, because abandoning
Chevron subverts every known principle of stare
decisis. Of course, respecting precedent is not an “inexorable
command.” Payne v. Tennessee, 501
U.S. 808, 828 (1991). But overthrowing it requires far more
than the majority has offered up here. Chevron is entitled
to stare decisis’s strongest form of protection. The
majority thus needs an exceptionally strong reason to overturn the
decision, above and beyond thinking it wrong. And it has nothing
approaching such a justification, proposing only a bewildering
theory about Chevron’s “unworkability.” Ante, at 32.
Just five years ago, this Court in Kisor rejected a plea to
overrule Auer v. Robbins, 519
U.S. 452 (1997), which requires judicial deference to agencies’
interpretations of their own regulations. See 588 U. S., at
586–589 (opinion of the Court). The case against overruling
Chevron is at least as strong. In particular, the majority’s
decision today will cause a massive shock to the legal system,
“cast[ing] doubt on many settled constructions” of statutes and
threatening the interests of many parties who have relied on them
for years. 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of the Court).

															Adherence to precedent is “a foundation stone of
the rule of law.” Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian
Community, 572 U.S.
782, 798 (2014). Stare decisis “promotes the evenhanded,
predictable, and consistent development of legal principles.”
Payne, 501 U. S., at 827. It enables people to order
their lives in reliance on judicial decisions. And it “contributes
to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process,” by
ensuring that those decisions are founded in the law, and not in
the “personal preferences” of judges. Id., at 828;
Dobbs, 597 U. S., at 388 (dissenting opinion). Perhaps
above all else, stare decisis is a “doctrine of judicial
modesty.” Id., at 363. In that, it shares something
important with Chevron. Both tell judges that they do not
know everything, and would do well to attend to the views of
others. So today, the majority rejects what judicial humility
counsels not just once but twice over.

															And Chevron is entitled to a particularly
strong form of stare decisis, for two separate reasons.
First, it matters that “Congress remains free to alter what we have
done.” Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491 U.S.
164, 173 (1989); see Kisor, 588 U. S., at 587
(opinion of the Court) (making the same point for Auer
deference). In a constitutional case, the Court alone can correct
an error. But that is not so here. “Our deference decisions are
balls tossed into Congress’s court, for acceptance or not as that
branch elects.” 588 U. S., at 587–588 (opinion of the Court).
And for generations now, Congress has chosen acceptance. Throughout
those years, Congress could have abolished Chevron across
the board, most easily by amending the APA. Or it could have
eliminated deferential review in discrete areas, by amending old
laws or drafting new laws to include an anti-Chevron
provision. Instead, Congress has “spurned multiple opportunities”
to do a comprehensive rejection of Chevron, and has hardly
ever done a targeted one. Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment,
LLC, 576 U.S.
446, 456 (2015); see supra, at 14–15. Or to put the
point more affirmatively, Congress has kept Chevron as is
for 40 years. It maintained that position even as Members of this
Court began to call Chevron into question. See ante,
at 30. From all it appears, Congress has not agreed with the view
of some Justices that they and other judges should have more
power.

															Second, Chevron is by now much more than
a single decision. This Court alone, acting as Chevron
allows, has upheld an agency’s reasonable interpretation of a
statute at least 70 times. See Brief for United States in No.
22–1219, p. 27; App. to id., at 68a–72a (collecting cases).
Lower courts have applied the Chevron framework on thousands
upon thousands of occasions. See K. Barnett & C. Walker,
Chevron and Stare Decisis, 31 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 475,
477, and n. 11 (2024) (noting that at last count,
Chevron was cited in more than 18,000 federal-court
decisions). The Kisor Court observed, when upholding
Auer, that “[d]eference to reasonable agency interpretations
of ambiguous rules pervades the whole corpus of administrative
law.” 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of the Court). So too does
deference to reasonable agency interpretations of ambiguous
statutes—except more so. Chevron is as embedded as embedded
gets in the law.

															The majority says differently, because this
Court has ignored Chevron lately; all that is left of the
decision is a “decaying husk with bold pretensions.” Ante,
at 33. Tell that to the D. C. Circuit, the court that reviews
a large share of agency interpretations, where Chevron
remains alive and well. See, e.g., Lissack v.
Commissioner, 68 F. 4th 1312, 1321–1322 (2023); Solar
Energy Industries Assn. v. FERC, 59 F. 4th 1287,
1291–1294 (2023). But more to the point: The majority’s argument is
a bootstrap. This Court has “avoided deferring under Chevron
since 2016” (ante, at 32) because it has been preparing to
overrule Chevron since around that time. That kind of
self-help on the way to reversing precedent has become almost
routine at this Court. Stop applying a decision where one should;
“throw some gratuitous criticisms into a couple of opinions”; issue
a few separate writings “question[ing the decision’s] premises”
(ante, at 30); give the whole process a few years
. . . and voila!—you have a justification for overruling
the decision. Janus v. State, County, and Municipal
Employees, 585 U.S. 878, 950 (2018) (Kagan, J., dissenting)
(discussing the overruling of Abood v. Detroit Bd. of
Ed., 431 U.S.
209 (1977)); see also, e.g., Kennedy v.
Bremerton School Dist., 597 U.S. 507, 571–572 (2022)
(Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (similar for Lemon v.
Kurtzman, 403 U.S.
602 (1971)); Shelby County v. Holder, 570 U.S.
529, 587–588 (2013) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (similar for
South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383
U.S. 301 (1966)). I once remarked that this
overruling-through-enfeeblement technique “mock[ed] stare
decisis.” Janus, 585 U. S., at 950 (dissenting
opinion). I have seen no reason to change my mind.

															The majority does no better in its main
justification for overruling Chevron—that the decision is
“unworkable.” Ante, at 30. The majority’s first theory on
that score is that there is no single “answer” about what
“ambiguity” means: Some judges turn out to see more of it than
others do, leading to “different results.” Ante, at 30–31.
But even if so, the legal system has for many years, in many
contexts, dealt perfectly well with that variation. Take contract
law. It is hornbook stuff that when (but only when) a contract is
ambiguous, a court interpreting it can consult extrinsic evidence.
See CNH Industrial N.V. v. Reese, 583 U.S. 133, 139
(2018) (per curiam). And when all interpretive tools still
leave ambiguity, the contract is construed against the drafter. See
Lamps Plus, Inc. v. Varela, 587 U.S. 176, 186–187
(2019). So I guess the contract rules of the 50 States are
unworkable now. Or look closer to home, to doctrines this Court
regularly applies. In deciding whether a government has waived
sovereign immunity, we construe “[a]ny ambiguities in the statutory
language” in “favor of immunity.” FAA v. Cooper,
566 U.S.
284, 290 (2012). Similarly, the rule of lenity tells us to
construe ambiguous statutes in favor of criminal defendants. See
United States v. Castleman, 572
U.S. 157, 172–173 (2014). And the canon of constitutional
avoidance instructs us to construe ambiguous laws to avoid
difficult constitutional questions. See United States v.
Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Cooperative, 532 U.S.
483, 494 (2001). I could go on, but the point is made. There
are ambiguity triggers all over the law. Somehow everyone seems to
get by.

															And Chevron is an especially puzzling
decision to criticize on the ground of generating too much judicial
divergence. There’s good empirical—meaning,
non-impressionistic—evidence on exactly that subject. And it shows
that, as compared with de novo review, use of the
Chevron two-step framework fosters agreement among
judges. See K. Barnett, C. Boyd, & C. Walker, Administrative
Law’s Political Dynamics, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 1463, 1502 (2018)
(Barnett). More particularly, Chevron has a “powerful
constraining effect on partisanship in judicial decisionmaking.”
Barnett 1463 (italics deleted); see Sunstein 1672 (“[A] predictable
effect of overruling Chevron would be to ensure a far
greater role for judicial policy preferences in statutory
interpretation and far more common splits along ideological
lines”). So if consistency among judges is the majority’s lodestar,
then the Court should not overrule Chevron, but return to
using it.

															The majority’s second theory on workability is
likewise a makeweight. Chevron, the majority complains, has
some exceptions, which (so the majority says) are “difficult” and
“complicate[d]” to apply. Ante, at 32. Recall that courts
are not supposed to defer when the agency construing a statute (1)
has not been charged with administering that law; (2) has not used
deliberative procedures—i.e., notice-and-comment rulemaking
or adjudication; or (3) is intervening in a “major question,” of
great economic and political significance. See supra, at
11–12; ante, at 27–28. As I’ve explained, those
exceptions—the majority also aptly calls them “refinements”—fit
with Chevron’s rationale: They define circumstances in which
Congress is unlikely to have wanted agency views to govern.
Ante, at 27; see supra, at 11–12. And on the
difficulty scale, they are nothing much. Has Congress put the
agency in charge of administering the statute? In 99 of 100 cases,
everyone will agree on the answer with scarcely a moment’s thought.
Did the agency use notice-and-comment or an adjudication before
rendering an interpretation? Once again, I could stretch my mind
and think up a few edge cases, but for the most part, the answer is
an easy yes or no. The major questions exception is, I acknowledge,
different: There, many judges have indeed disputed its nature and
scope. Compare, e.g., West Virginia, 597
U. S., at 721–724, with id., at 764–770 (Kagan, J.,
dissenting). But that disagreement concerns, on everyone’s view, a
tiny subset of all agency interpretations. For the most part, the
exceptions that so upset the majority require merely a rote,
check-the-box inquiry. If that is the majority’s idea of a
“dizzying breakdance,” ante, at 32, the majority needs to
get out more.

															And anyway, difficult as compared to what? The
majority’s prescribed way of proceeding is no walk in the park.
First, the majority makes clear that what is usually called
Skidmore deference continues to apply. See ante, at
16–17. Under that decision, agency interpretations “constitute a
body of experience and informed judgment” that may be “entitled to
respect.” Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S.
134, 140 (1944). If the majority thinks that the same judges
who argue today about where “ambiguity” resides (see ante,
at 30) are not going to argue tomorrow about what “respect”
requires, I fear it will be gravely disappointed. Second, the
majority directs courts to comply with the varied ways in which
Congress in fact “delegates discretionary authority” to agencies.
Ante, at 17–18. For example, Congress may authorize an
agency to “define[ ]” or “delimit[ ]” statutory terms or
concepts, or to “fill up the details” of a statutory scheme.
Ante, at 17, and n. 5. Or Congress may use, in
describing an agency’s regulatory authority, inherently
“flexib[le]” language like “appropriate” or “reasonable.”
Ante, at 17, and n. 6. Attending to every such delegation,
as the majority says, is necessary in a world without
Chevron. But that task involves complexities of its own.
Indeed, one reason Justice Scalia supported Chevron was that
it replaced such a “statute-by-statute evaluation (which was
assuredly a font of uncertainty and litigation) with an
across-the-board presumption.” A. Scalia, Judicial Deference to
Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L. J. 511, 516. As
a lover of the predictability that rules create, Justice Scalia
thought the latter “unquestionably better.” Id., at 517.

															On the other side of the balance, the most
important stare decisis factor—call it the “jolt to the
legal system” issue—weighs heavily against overruling
Chevron. Dobbs, 597 U. S., at 357 (Roberts,
C. J., concurring in judgment). Congress and agencies alike
have relied on Chevron—have assumed its existence—in much of
their work for the last 40 years. Statutes passed during that time
reflect the expectation that Chevron would allocate
interpretive authority between agencies and courts. Rules issued
during the period likewise presuppose that statutory ambiguities
were the agencies’ to (reasonably) resolve. Those agency
interpretations may have benefited regulated entities; or they may
have protected members of the broader public. Either way, private
parties have ordered their affairs—their business and financial
decisions, their health-care decisions, their educational
decisions—around agency actions that are suddenly now subject to
challenge. In Kisor, this Court refused to overrule
Auer because doing so would “cast doubt on” many
longstanding constructions of rules, and thereby upset settled
expectations. 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of the Court).
Overruling Chevron, and thus raising new doubts about agency
constructions of statutes, will be far more disruptive.

															The majority tries to alleviate concerns about a
piece of that problem: It states that judicial decisions that have
upheld agency action as reasonable under Chevron should not
be overruled on that account alone. See ante, at 34–35. That
is all to the good: There are thousands of such decisions, many
settled for decades. See supra, at 26. But first, reasonable
reliance need not be predicated on a prior judicial decision. Some
agency interpretations never challenged under Chevron now
will be; expectations formed around those constructions thus could
be upset, in a way the majority’s assurance does not touch. And
anyway, how good is that assurance, really? The majority says that
a decision’s “[m]ere reliance on Chevron” is not enough to
counter the force of stare decisis; a challenger will need
an additional “special justification.” Ante, at 34. The
majority is sanguine; I am not so much. Courts motivated to
overrule an old Chevron-based decision can always come up
with something to label a “special justification.” Maybe a court
will say “the quality of [the precedent’s] reasoning” was poor.
Ante, at 29. Or maybe the court will discover something
“unworkable” in the decision—like some exception that has to be
applied. Ante, at 30. All a court need do is look to today’s
opinion to see how it is done.

															IV

															Judges are not experts in the field, and
are not part of either political branch of the Government.

															  — Chevron
U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
Council, Inc., 467 U.S.
837, 865 (1984)

															Those were the days, when we knew what we are
not. When we knew that as between courts and agencies, Congress
would usually think agencies the better choice to resolve the
ambiguities and fill the gaps in regulatory statutes. Because
agencies are “experts in the field.” And because they
are part of a political branch, with a claim to making
interstitial policy. And because Congress has charged them, not us,
with administering the statutes containing the open questions. At
its core, Chevron is about respecting that allocation of
responsibility—the conferral of primary authority over regulatory
matters to agencies, not courts.

															Today, the majority does not respect that
judgment. It gives courts the power to make all manner of
scientific and technical judgments. It gives courts the power to
make all manner of policy calls, including about how to weigh
competing goods and values. (See Chevron itself.) It puts
courts at the apex of the administrative process as to every
conceivable subject—because there are always gaps and ambiguities
in regulatory statutes, and often of great import. What actions can
be taken to address climate change or other environmental
challenges? What will the Nation’s health-care system look like in
the coming decades? Or the financial or transportation systems?
What rules are going to constrain the development of A.I.? In every
sphere of current or future federal regulation, expect courts from
now on to play a commanding role. It is not a role Congress has
given to them, in the APA or any other statute. It is a role this
Court has now claimed for itself, as well as for other judges.

															And that claim requires disrespecting, too, this
Court’s precedent. There are no special reasons, of the kind
usually invoked for overturning precedent, to eliminate
Chevron deference. And given Chevron’s pervasiveness,
the decision to do so is likely to produce large-scale disruption.
All that backs today’s decision is the majority’s belief that
Chevron was wrong—that it gave agencies too much power and
courts not enough. But shifting views about the worth of regulatory
actors and their work do not justify overhauling a cornerstone of
administrative law. In that sense too, today’s majority has lost
sight of its proper role.

															And it is impossible to pretend that today’s
decision is a one-off, in either its treatment of agencies or its
treatment of precedent. As to the first, this very Term presents
yet another example of the Court’s resolve to roll back agency
authority, despite congressional direction to the contrary. See
SEC v. Jarkesy, 603 U. S. ___ (2024); see also
supra, at 3. As to the second, just my own defenses of
stare decisis—my own dissents to this Court’s reversals of
settled law—by now fill a small volume. See Dobbs, 597
U. S., at 363–364 (joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and
Kagan, JJ.); Edwards v. Vannoy, 593 U.S. 255, 296–297
(2021); Knick v. Township of Scott, 588 U.S. 180,
207–208 (2019); Janus, 585 U. S., at 931–932.
Once again, with respect, I dissent.

Notes
1
*Justice Jackson did not
participate in the consideration or decision of the case in No.
22–451 and joins this opinion only as it applies to the case in No.
22–1219.
2
 Note that presumptions of
this kind are common in the law. In other contexts, too, the Court
responds to a congressional lack of direction by adopting a
presumption about what Congress wants, rather than trying to figure
that out in every case. And then Congress can legislate, with
“predictable effects,” against that “stable background” rule.
Morrison v. National Australia Bank Ltd., 561 U.S.
247, 261 (2010). Take the presumption against
extraterritoriality: The Court assumes Congress means for its
statutes to apply only within the United States, absent a “clear
indication” to the contrary. Id., at 255. Or the presumption
against retroactivity: The Court assumes Congress wants its laws to
apply only prospectively, unless it “unambiguously instruct[s]”
something different. Vartelas v. Holder, 566 U.S.
257, 266 (2012). Or the presumption against repeal of statutes
by implication: The Court assumes Congress does not intend a later
statute to displace an earlier one unless it makes that intention
“clear and manifest.” Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis,
584 U.S. 497, 510 (2018). Or the (so far unnamed) presumption
against treating a procedural requirement as “jurisdictional”
unless “Congress clearly states that it is.” Boechler v.
Commissioner, 596 U.S. 199, 203 (2022). I could continue,
except that this footnote is long enough. The Chevron
deference rule is to the same effect: The Court generally assumes
that Congress intends to confer discretion on agencies to handle
statutory ambiguities or gaps, absent a direction to the contrary.
The majority calls that presumption a “fiction,” ante, at
26, but it is no more so than any of the presumptions listed above.
They all are best guesses—and usually quite good guesses—by courts
about congressional intent.
3
 The majority tries to
buttress its argument with a stray sentence or two from the APA’s
legislative history, but the same response holds. As the majority
notes, see ante, at 15, the House and Senate Reports each
stated that Section 706 “provid[ed] that questions of law are for
courts rather than agencies to decide in the last analysis.”
H. R. Rep. No. 1980, 79th Cong., 2d Sess., 44 (1946); S. Rep.
No. 752, 79th Cong., 1st Sess., 28 (1945). But that statement also
does not address the standard of review that courts should then
use. When a court defers under Chevron, it reviews the
agency’s construction for reasonableness “in the last analysis.”
The views of Representative Walter, which the majority also cites,
further demonstrate my point. He stated that the APA would require
courts to “determine independently all relevant questions of law,”
but he also stated that courts would be required to “exercise
. . . independent judgment” in applying the
substantial-evidence standard (a deferential standard if ever there
were one). 92 Cong. Rec. 5654 (1946). He therefore did not equate
“independent” review with de novo review; he thought
that a court could conduct independent review of agency action
using a deferential standard.
4
 In a footnote responding
to the last two paragraphs, the majority raises the white flag on
Section 706’s text. See ante, at 15, n. 4. Yes, it
finally concedes, Section 706 does not say that
de novo review is required for an agency’s statutory
construction. Rather, the majority says, “some things go without
saying,” and de novo review is such a thing. See
ibid. But why? What extra-textual considerations force us to
read Section 706 the majority’s way? In its footnote, the majority
repairs only to history. But as I will explain below, the majority
also gets wrong the most relevant history, pertaining to how
judicial review of agency interpretations operated in the years
before the APA was enacted. See infra, at
19–23.
5
 I concede one exception
(whose view was “almost completely isolated,” Levin 181), but his
comments on Section 706 refute a different aspect of the majority’s
argument. Professor John Dickinson, as the majority notes, thought
that Section 706 precluded courts from deferring to agency
interpretations. See Administrative Procedure Act: Scope and
Grounds of Broadened Judicial Review, 33 A. B. A. J. 434, 516
(1947) (Dickinson); ante, at 16. But unlike the majority, he
viewed that bar as “a change” to, not a restatement of, pre-APA
law. Compare Dickinson 516 with ante, at 15–16. So if the
majority really wants to rely on Professor Dickinson, it will have
to give up the claim, which I address below, that the law before
the APA forbade deference. See infra, at 19–23.
6
 Because the APA was meant
to “restate[ ] the present law,” the judicial review practices
of the 1940s are more important to understanding the statute than
is any earlier tradition (such as the majority dwells on). But
before I expand on those APA-contemporaneous practices, I pause to
note that they were “not built on sand.” Kisor v.
Wilkie, 588 U.S. 558, 568–569 (2019) (plurality opinion).
Since the early days of the Republic, this Court has given
significant weight to official interpretations of “ambiguous
law[s].” Edwards’ Lessee v. Darby, 12 Wheat. 206, 210
(1827). With the passage of time—and the growth of the
administrative sphere—those “judicial expressions of deference
increased.” H. Monaghan, Marbury and the Administrative
State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 15 (1983). By the early 20th
century, the Court stated that it would afford “great weight” to an
agency construction in the face of statutory “uncertainty or
ambiguity.” National Lead Co. v. United States,
252 U.S.
140, 145 (1920); see Schell’s Executors v.
Fauché, 138 U.S.
562, 572 (1891) (“controlling” weight in “all cases of
ambiguity”); United States v. Alabama Great Southern R.
Co., 142 U.S.
615, 621 (1892) (“decisive” weight “in case of ambiguity”);
Jacobs v. Prichard, 223 U.S.
200, 214 (1912) (referring to the “rule which gives strength”
to official interpretations if “ambiguity exist[s]”). So even
before the New Deal, a strand of this Court’s cases exemplified
deference to executive constructions of ambiguous statutes. And
then, as I show in the text, the New Deal arrived and deference
surged—creating the “present law” that the APA
“restated.”
7
 The majority says that I
have “pluck[ed] out” Gray and Hearst, impliedly from
a vast number of not-so-helpful cases. Ante, at 13,
n. 3. It would make as much sense to say that a judge “plucked
out” Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S.
474 (1951), to discuss substantial-evidence review or “plucked
out” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States, Inc. v.
State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
29 (1983), to discuss arbitrary-and-capricious review.
Gray and Hearst, as noted above, were the leading
cases about agency interpretations in the years before the APA’s
enactment. But just to gild the lily, here are a number of other
Supreme Court decisions from the five years prior to the APA’s
enactment that were of a piece: United States v. Pierce
Auto Freight Lines, Inc., 327 U.S.
515, 536
(1946); ICC v. Parker, 326 U.S.
60, 65 (1945); Federal Security Administrator v.
Quaker Oats Co., 318 U.S.
218, 227–228 (1943). The real “pluck[ing]” offense is the
majority’s—for taking a stray sentence from Hearst
(ante, at 13, n. 3) to suggest that both Hearst
and Gray stand for the opposite of what they actually
do.


