::decision_cite:: 22-448
::decision_name::  Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Assn. of America, Ltd.
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–448

															_________________

															CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU, et al.,
PETITIONERS v. COMMUNITY FINANCIAL SERVICES ASSOCIATION OF
AMERICA, LIMITED, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[May 16, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Our Constitution gives Congress control over the
public fisc, but it specifies that its control must be exercised in
a specific manner. The Appropriations Clause commands that “[n]o
Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of
Appropriations made by Law.” Art. I, §9, cl. 7. For most
federal agencies, Congress provides funding on an annual basis.
This annual process forces them to regularly implore Congress to
fund their operations for the next year. The Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau is different. The Bureau does not have to
petition for funds each year. Instead, Congress authorized the
Bureau to draw from the Federal Reserve System the amount its
Director deems “reasonably necessary to carry out” the Bureau’s
duties, subject only to an inflation-adjusted cap. 124Stat. 1975,
12 U. S. C. §§5497(a)(1), (2). In this case, we must
decide the narrow question whether this funding mechanism complies
with the Appropriations Clause. We hold that it does.

															I

															A

															Congress enacted the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act in response to the 2008
financial crisis. 124Stat. 1376. The Act created an independent
financial regulator within the Federal Reserve System known as the
Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. 12 U. S. C.
§5491(a). Congress charged the Bureau with enforcing consumer
financial protection laws to ensure “that all consumers have access
to markets for consumer financial products and services and that
markets for consumer financial products and services are fair,
transparent, and competitive.” §5511(a). The Act consolidated in
the Bureau the authority to administer 18 existing consumer
protection statutes, among them the Fair Debt Collection Practices
Act, the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and the Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act of 1975. §§5512(a), 5481(12), (14). Additionally,
the Act made it unlawful for those offering consumer financial
products and services “to engage in any unfair, deceptive, or
abusive act or practice.” §5536(a)(1)(B). Congress vested the
Bureau with rulemaking, enforcement, and adjudicatory authority
over the statutes that it administers. See §§5531(a)–(b),
5581(a)(1)(A), (b) (rulemaking authority); §§5562–5565 (enforcement
and adjudicatory authority).

															In addition to vesting the Bureau with sweeping
authority, Congress shielded the Bureau from the influence of the
political branches. To insulate the Bureau from the President’s
control, Congress put a single Director with a 5-year term at the
Bureau’s helm and made the Director removable only for
inefficiency, neglect, or malfeasance. §§5491(b)–(c). This Court
held in Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, 591 U.S. 197 (2020), that the combination of
single-Director leadership and for-cause removal protection
unconstitutionally circumscribed the President’s ability to oversee
the Executive Branch. Id., at 208.

															This case involves another one of the Bureau’s
novel structural features, one that limits Congress’ control.
Congress supplies most federal agencies with the funds necessary
for their operations only on an annual basis, so those agencies
must ask Congress for renewed funding each year. For the Bureau,
however, Congress diminished this accountability by providing the
Bureau a standing source of funding outside the ordinary annual
appropriations process. Each year, the Bureau may requisition from
the earnings of the Federal Reserve System “the amount determined
by the [Bureau’s] Director to be reasonably necessary to carry out”
its duties, subject only to a statutory cap. §5497(a)(1). The
Bureau cannot request more than 12 percent of the Federal Reserve
System’s total operating expenses as reported in fiscal year 2009
(adjusted for inflation). §§5497(a)(2)(A)–(B). In fiscal year 2022,
that cap was about $734 million. See Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, Financial Report of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau 7 (Fiscal year 2022). The Bureau can also retain and invest
unused funds from year to year, though the Director must take into
account any surplus when requesting additional funds. §§5497(a)(1),
(b)(3), (c).

															B

															In 2017, the Bureau promulgated a regulation
focused on high-interest consumer loans. See Payday, Vehicle Title,
and Certain High-Cost Installment Loans, 12 CFR pt. 1041 (2018)
(Payday Lending Rule). Among other things, the regulation restricts
lenders’ ability to obtain loan payments through preauthorized
account access after two unsuccessful withdrawal attempts.
Ibid. The Community Financial Services Association of
America and Consumer Service Alliance of Texas, trade associations
that represent payday lenders and credit-access businesses,
challenged the Payday Lending Rule on statutory and constitutional
grounds. In the operative complaint, the associations argued, among
other things, that the Bureau “takes federal government money
without an appropriations act” in violation of the Appropriations
Clause. Amended Complaint in No. 1:18–cv–00295 (WD Tex.), ECF Doc.
76, p. 30.

															The District Court granted summary judgment to
the Bureau. As relevant, the court explained that “[t]he
Appropriations Clause ‘means simply that no money can be paid out
of the Treasury unless it has been appropriated by an act of
Congress.’ ” 558 F. Supp. 3d 350, 364 (WD Tex. 2021)
(quoting Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond,
496 U.S.
414, 424 (1990)). And, because “a statute authorizes” the
disbursements from the Federal Reserve System’s combined earnings
to the Bureau “up to a certain cap,” the District Court concluded,
“there is no Appropriations Clause issue.” 558 F. Supp. 3d, at
364. On appeal, the associations renewed their argument that the
“Bureau’s funding mechanism usurps Congress’s role in the
appropriation of federal funds” by allowing it to take “federal
money without an appropriations act.” Brief for Appellants in No.
21–50826 (CA5), p. 28.

															The Court of Appeals agreed with this argument
and reversed. 51 F. 4th 616 (CA5 2022). Drawing on the
Constitution’s text and history, the court concluded that the
Appropriations Clause “does more than reinforce Congress’s power
over fiscal matters; it affirmatively obligates Congress to use
that authority ‘to maintain the boundaries between the branches and
preserve individual liberty from the encroachments of executive
power.’ ” Id., at 637 (quoting Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau v. All Am. Check Cashing, Inc., 33
F. 4th 218, 231 (CA5 2022) (en banc) (Jones, J., concurring)).
By giving the Bureau a “self-actualizing, perpetual funding
mechanism,” the court reasoned, Congress in effect abandoned this
obligation. 51 F. 4th, at 638–639. It was not enough that Congress
enacted the law authorizing the Bureau’s funding because a “law
alone does not suffice—an appropriation is required.”
Id., at 640. The court thus held that the Bureau’s funding
mechanism violates the Appropriations Clause. Id., at
642.

															We granted certiorari to address the narrow
question whether the statute that provides funding to the Bureau
violates the Appropriations Clause. 598 U. S. ___ (2023). We
now reverse.

															II

															Under the Appropriations Clause, an
appropriation is simply a law that authorizes expenditures from a
specified source of public money for designated purposes. The
statute that provides the Bureau’s funding meets these
requirements. We therefore conclude that the Bureau’s funding
mechanism does not violate the Appropriations Clause.

															A

															The Appropriations Clause provides that “[n]o
Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of
Appropriations made by Law.” Art. I, §9, cl. 7. Textually, the
command is unmistakable—“no money can be paid out of the Treasury
unless it has been appropriated by an act of Congress.”
Cincinnati Soap Co. v. United States, 301 U.S.
308, 321 (1937). Our decisions have long given the
Appropriations Clause this straightforward reading. See,
e.g., Office of Personnel Management, 496 U. S.,
at 424 (“Money may be paid out only through an appropriation made
by law; in other words, the payment of money from the Treasury must
be authorized by a statute”); Reeside v. Walker, 11
How. 272, 291 (1851) (“However much money may be in the Treasury at
any one time, not a dollar of it can be used in the payment of any
thing not . . . previously sanctioned” through an
appropriation made by Congress).

															As a threshold matter, the parties agree that
the Bureau’s funding must comply with the Appropriations Clause.
The Appropriations Clause applies to money “drawn from the
Treasury.” Art. I, §9, cl. 7. The Bureau draws money from the
Federal Reserve System. 12 U. S. C. §5497(a)(1). And,
surplus funds in the Federal Reserve System would otherwise be
deposited into the general fund of the Treasury. §289(a)(3)(B).
Whatever the scope of the term “Treasury” in the Appropriations
Clause, money otherwise destined for the general fund of the
Treasury qualifies. The Bureau’s funding is therefore subject to
the requirements of the Appropriations Clause.

															The associations’ challenge turns solely on
whether the Bureau’s funding mechanism constitutes an
“Appropriatio[n] made by Law.” This question divided the courts
below. The District Court concluded that a valid appropriation is
nothing more than a statute that “authorizes an agency to receive
funds up to a certain cap.” 558 F. Supp. 3d, at 364; see also
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Law Offices of
Crystal Moroney, 63 F. 4th 174, 181 (CA2 2023). The Court
of Appeals, on the other hand, suggested that appropriations must
also “meet the Framers’ salutary aims of separating and checking
powers and preserving accountability to the people.” 51
F. 4th, at 640. The associations defend this understanding and
argue that the statute that provides the Bureau’s funding
undermines these aims by allowing the agency to indefinitely choose
its own level of annual funding, subject only to an illusory cap.
That is, the associations contend that the Bureau’s funding
mechanism is too open-ended in duration and amount to satisfy the
requirement that there be an “Appropriatio[n] made by Law.”

															Based on the Constitution’s text, the history
against which that text was enacted, and congressional practice
immediately following ratification, we conclude that appropriations
need only identify a source of public funds and authorize the
expenditure of those funds for designated purposes to satisfy the
Appropriations Clause.

															1

															The Constitution’s text requires an
“Appropriatio[n] made by Law.” Art. I, §9, cl. 7. Our concern
is principally with the meaning of the word “appropriation.” The
Constitution’s use of the term “appropriation” in the
Appropriations Clause and in other Clauses provides important
contextual clues about its meaning. To state the obvious, the
Appropriations Clause itself makes clear that an appropriation must
authorize withdrawals from a particular source—the public treasury.
It provides that money may be “drawn from the Treasury” only “in
Consequence of Appropriations made by Law.” Cl. 7. The section
preceding the Appropriations Clause further suggests that
appropriations assign funds for specific uses: Congress has the
power to “raise and support Armies,” but subject to the limitation
that “no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer
Term than two Years.” §8, cl. 12.

															At the time the Constitution was ratified,
“appropriation” meant “[t]he act of sequestering, or assigning to a
particular use or person, in exclusion of all others.” 1 N.
Webster, An American Dictionary of the English Language (1828); see
also 1 J. Ash, The New and Complete Dictionary of the English
Language (2d ed. 1795) (“[t]he application of something to a
particular use”); 1 S. Johnson, A Dictionary of the English
Language (6th ed. 1785) (“[t]he application of something to a
particular purpose”); T. Dyche & W. Pardon, A New General
English Dictionary (14th ed. 1771) (“the appointing a thing to a
particular use”). In ordinary usage, then, an appropriation of
public money would be a law authorizing the expenditure of
particular funds for specified ends.

															Taken as a whole, this evidence suggests that,
at a minimum, appropriations were understood as a legislative means
of authorizing expenditure from a source of public funds for
designated purposes.

															2

															Pre-founding history supports the conclusion
that an identified source and purpose are all that is required for
a valid appropriation. The concept of legislative “appropriations”
grew out of the broader struggle for popular control of the purse
in England. Throughout the Middle Ages, the King enjoyed near total
fiscal independence. At that time, the King’s revenues came largely
from hereditary sources, sometimes called “ordinary” revenues. 1 W.
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 281 (1771)
(Commentaries). These ordinary revenues flowed from many sources,
including the “rents and profits of the demesne lands of the
crown,” id., at 286, and the fines, forfeitures, and fees
“arising from the king’s ordinary courts of justice,” id.,
at 289. Because this revenue inhered in the King himself,
Parliament had little claim to direct how it was spent. See F.
Maitland, The Constitutional History of England 430 (1908)
(Maitland).

															But, when these unencumbered ordinary revenues
did not satisfy the demands of royal governance, most often during
wartime, the King had to seek what Blackstone called
“extraordinary revenue.” Commentaries 306. Extraordinary
revenues were financed through various forms of taxation and
therefore required parliamentary authorization. Id., at 169,
307; see Magna Charta, ch. 12 (1215), in A. Howard, Magna Carta:
Text and Commentary 40 (rev. ed. 1998). In granting extraordinary
revenues, Parliament began exercising an attendant power to specify
how the Crown used these funds. Maitland 183–184; see also T.
Taswell-Langmead, English Constitutional History: From the Teutonic
Conquest to the Present Time 219, 229 (6th ed. 1905). That is,
Parliament “claimed the power to appropriate the supplies granted
to the king.” Maitland 183–184.

															Conditions in the 17th century shifted the
balance of power toward Parliament. A combination of rising prices
and increasing demands made it so that the King’s ordinary revenues
could not satisfy the costs of royal governance, even in times of
peace. D. Keir, The Constitutional History of Modern Britain Since
1485, pp. 180–181 (6th ed. 1960); P. Einzig, The Control of the
Purse 57 (1959). The King’s financial weakness, and Parliament’s
increasing assertiveness in appropriating extraordinary revenues,
led to intragovernmental strife. The ensuing power struggle
culminated in the Glorious Revolution, in which Parliament stripped
away the remnants of the King’s hereditary revenues and thereby
secured supremacy in fiscal matters. Commentaries 306, 333;
Maitland 434.

															Following the Glorious Revolution, Parliament’s
usual practice was to appropriate government revenue “to particular
purposes more or less narrowly defined.” Id., at 433.
Additionally, Parliament began limiting the duration of its revenue
grants. For example, the duties on tonnage and poundage were no
longer granted to the King for life, but only for a term of years.
See 2 Wm. & Mary, c. 4, §1 (1690); 6 Wm. & Mary, c. 1, §1
(1694); see also D. Gill, The Treasury, 1660–1714, 46 Eng. Hist.
Rev. 600, 610 (1931). Limiting the duration of these and other
revenue grants ensured that the King could not rule without
Parliament. As one historian described it, Parliament made sure
“the Crown should be altogether unable to pay its way without an
annual meeting of Parliament. . . . Every year he and his
Ministers had to come, cap in hand, to the House of Commons, and
more often than not the Commons drove a bargain and exacted a
quid pro quo in return for supply.” G. Trevelyan, The
English Revolution 1688–1689, pp. 180–181 (1939).

															Even with this newfound fiscal supremacy,
Parliament did not micromanage every aspect of the King’s finances.
Not all post-Glorious Revolution grants of supplies were time
limited. A notable exception involved what came to be known as the
civil list. Despite its established power to limit the duration of
revenue grants, Parliament deemed it proper to cover the expenses
of the King’s household and the civil government by appropriating
revenue to that purpose for life. Maitland 435–436; see also E.
Reitan, The Civil List in Eighteenth-Century British Politics, 9
Hist. J. 318, 319 (1966) (Reitan) (explaining that the “Crown was
to meet the costs of the civil government” out of the civil list,
including “the fees and salaries of the ministers and many other
public officers, the salaries of many of the small fry in various
government departments, the salaries and pensions of judges, the
salaries and allowances of ambassadors and consuls, and the
maintenance of buildings for Parliament and the public offices”).
And, parliamentary grants of supplies ordinarily gave the Crown
broad discretion regarding how much to spend within an appropriated
sum. Statutes granting money often stated that the Crown could
spend “any Sum not exceeding” a particular amount. See,
e.g., 13 Anne, c. 18, §69 (1713); 1 Anne,
c. 6, §130 (1702). These grants were permissive. As Maitland
explained, “Money is granted to the queen; it is placed at the
disposal of her and her ministers. But she and they are not bound
by law to spend it, at least not bound by the Appropriation Act.”
Maitland 445. Other parliamentary appropriations acts, however,
required that money be spent for particular purposes. See,
e.g., 2 Wm. & Mary, c. 1, §§35–36 (1690); 3
Wm. & Mary, c. 5, §§42–43 (1691); see also M. Rappaport,
The Selective Nondelegation Doctrine and the Line Item Veto, 76
Tulane L. Rev. 265, 327, n. 211 (2001) (Rappaport).

															The appropriations practice in the Colonies and
early state legislatures was much the same. “When called upon to
grant supplies,” the lower houses in the colonial assemblies
“insisted upon appropriating them in detail.” J. Greene, The Quest
for Power: The Lower Houses of Assembly in the Southern Royal
Colonies 1689–1776, p. 88 (1963). Many early state constitutions
vested the legislative body with power over appropriations.
Rappaport 332–333. And, in exercising that authority, state
legislative bodies often opted for open-ended, discretionary
appropriations. See, e.g., Act of Mar. 31, 1788, 1787
Mass. Acts and Laws ch. 63, p. 657 (“[T]he amount of all duties
collected by virtue of this Act shall be, and is hereby
appropriated to & for the support of the civil government of
this Commonwealth”); Act of Nov. 17, 1786, 1786 Mass. Acts and Laws
ch. 47, p. 117 (appropriating one-third of revenue “for the
exigencies of Government”); An act to amend and reduce the several
acts for appropriating the public revenue, into one act, 1784 Va.
Acts ch. 46, §1, reprinted in 11 W. Hening’s Statutes at Large
434 (1823) (“The money arising [from certain taxes] shall form a
general fund, ten thousand pounds of which per annum shall be at
the disposal of the executive, to defray the contingent charges of
government”); An act to amend the act for appropriating the public
revenue, 1783 Va. Acts ch. 11, §4, reprinted in id., at
248 (Half of “all the revenue arising from the tax on free male
tithables . . . shall be applied . . . to the
support of civil government”); An act for the defence of the bay,
and to impose certain duties on imported articles, 1783 Md. Acts
ch. 26, §5, reprinted in 1 W. Kilty, The Laws of Maryland (1799)
(“[A]ll the duties imposed by this act on the trade of this state
shall be appropriated for the defence of the bay and the protection
of trade”).

															By the time of the Constitutional Convention,
the principle of legislative supremacy over fiscal matters
engendered little debate and created no disagreement. It was
uncontroversial that the powers to raise and disburse public money
would reside in the Legislative Branch. The only disagreement was
about whether the right to originate taxation and appropriations
bills should rest in a legislative body with proportionate
representation. Having reached a tentative agreement on that
difference, the Committee of Detail reported a draft constitution
giving the House of Representatives the power to originate all
revenue and appropriations laws. This proposed draft contained the
prototype of what later became the Appropriations Clause. It
provided that “[a]ll bills for raising or appropriating money
. . . shall originate in the House of Representatives,
and shall not be altered or amended by the Senate. No money shall
be drawn from the public Treasury, but in pursuance of
appropriations that shall originate in the House of
Representatives.” 2 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p.
178 (M. Farrand ed. 1911). Ultimately, the Convention agreed to
grant the House an exclusive power to originate revenue laws but
not for appropriations laws. Compare Art. I, §7, cl. 1, with
§9, cl. 7.

															In short, the origins of the Appropriations
Clause confirm that appropriations needed to designate particular
revenues for identified purposes. Beyond that, however, early
legislative bodies exercised a wide range of discretion. Some
appropriations required expenditure of a particular amount, while
others allowed the recipient of the appropriated money to spend up
to a cap. Some appropriations were time limited, others were not.
And, the specificity with which appropriations designated the
objects of the expenditures varied greatly.

															3

															The practice of the First Congress also
illustrates the source-and-purpose understanding of appropriations.
This practice “provides contemporaneous and weighty evidence of the
Constitution’s meaning.” Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S.
714, 723 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															Many early appropriations laws made annual
lump-sum grants for the Government’s expenses. Congress’ first
annual appropriations law, for instance, divided Government
expenditures into four broad categories and authorized
disbursements up to certain amounts for those purposes. For
example, the law appropriated a “sum not exceeding two hundred and
sixteen thousand dollars for defraying the expenses of the civil
list,” which covered most nonmilitary executive officers’ salaries
and expenses. Act of Sept. 29, 1789, ch. 23, 1Stat. 95; see 5
Papers of Alexander Hamilton 381–388 (H. Syrett & J. Cooke eds.
1962) (reporting detailed line-item estimates for civil-list
expenditures). And, it appropriated “a sum not exceeding one
hundred and thirty-seven thousand dollars for defraying the
expenses of the department of war.” 1Stat. 95. The law specified
that the disbursements would “be paid out of the monies which
arise, either from the requisitions heretofore made upon the
several states, or from the duties on impost and tonnage.”
Ibid. Subsequent annual appropriations laws followed a
similar pattern. See Act of Mar. 26, 1790, ch. 4, 1Stat. 104;
Act of Feb. 11, 1791, ch. 6, 1Stat. 190; Act of Dec. 23, 1791,
ch. 3, 1Stat. 226.

															The appropriation of “sums not exceeding” a
specified amount did not by itself mandate that the Executive spend
that amount; as was the case in England, such appropriations
instead provided the Executive discretion over how much to spend up
to a cap. In 1803, for instance, Congress appropriated “a sum not
exceeding fifty thousand dollars” to build up to “fifteen gun
boats.” Act of Feb. 28, 1803, ch. 11, 2Stat. 206. President
Jefferson subsequently reported, however, that “[t]he sum of fifty
thousand dollars appropriated by Congress for providing gun boats
remains unexpended. The favorable and peaceable turn of affairs on
the Mississippi rendered an immediate execution of that law
unnecessary.” 13 Annals of Cong. 14 (1803).

															Congress took even more flexible approaches to
appropriations for several early executive agencies and allowed the
agencies to indefinitely fund themselves directly from revenue
collected. Soon after convening, Congress enacted laws that imposed
a detailed schedule of duties on imported goods and tonnage. See
Act of July 4, 1789, ch. 2, 1Stat. 24–27 (imposing duties on
imported goods, wares, and merchandises); Act of July 20, 1789,
ch. 3, 1Stat. 27–28 (imposing duties on tonnage). It then
divided the Nation into customs districts and established a vast
federal bureaucracy to oversee the collection of those duties. Act
of July 31, 1789, ch. 5, 1Stat. 29–49. Rather than fund those
customs officials through annual appropriations, Congress opted for
a fee-based model. Customs collectors were compensated through
tonnage- and transaction-based fees specified by law, and through a
commission on the amount of duties raised within their districts.
For example, customs collectors were entitled to collect from
merchants two-and-a-half dollars “for every entrance of any ship or
vessel of one hundred tons burthen or upwards” and 20 cents “for
every permit to land goods.” Id., at 44. And, collectors in
the largest ports were paid “half a per centum on the amount of all
monies by them respectively received and paid into the treasury of
the United States.” Id., at 45. Other customs functionaries
were also compensated on a fee basis. For instance, customs
collectors paid weighers 18 cents “out of the revenue” collected
“for the measurement of every one hundred bushels of salt or
grain.” Ibid.

															Congress adopted a similarly open-ended funding
scheme for the Post Office. Instead of appropriating funds on an
annual basis, Congress authorized the Postmaster General to “defray
the expense” of carrying the mail of the United States with the
revenues generated through postage assessments. Act of Feb. 20,
1792, §3, 1Stat. 234. The postal statute also provided the
Postmaster General a $2,000 annual salary “to be paid
. . . out of the revenues of the post-office.” §8,
id., at 235. And, it authorized the Postmaster General to
pay deputy postmasters “such commission on the monies arising from
the postage of letters and packets, as he shall think adequate to
their respective services,” subject to an upper limit. §23,
id., at 238. These fee-based funding schemes continued year
after year without Congress passing an annual appropriation for
these agencies.

															These fee- and commission-based funding schemes
were not an American innovation; they emulated the colonial
precursors to the Customs Service and Post Office. Colonial customs
officers, for instance, “were paid a percentage of total receipts
in their area, the proportion varying from colony to colony
depending on the estimated potential yield.” T. Barrow, Trade and
Empire: The British Customs Service in Colonial America 1660–1775,
p. 14 (1967). Although the customs service in the Colonies later
transitioned to a salary system, each customs “official was allowed
certain fees for almost every transaction.” Id., at 78. And,
as to the postal service, the Continental Congress allowed
postmaster deputies 20 percent “on the sums they collect and pay
into the General post office annually,” up to $1,000, and 10
percent on sums over that amount. 2 Journals of the Continental
Congress, 1774–1789, p. 208 (W. Ford ed. 1905).

															Postratification practice therefore confirms our
interpretation of the Appropriations Clause. Early appropriations
displayed significant variety in their structure. Each, however,
adhered to the minimum requirements of an identifiable source of
public funds and purpose.

															B

															The Bureau’s funding statute contains the
requisite features of a congressional appropriation. The statute
authorizes the Bureau to draw public funds from a particular
source—“the combined earnings of the Federal Reserve System,” in an
amount not exceeding an inflation-adjusted cap. 12
U. S. C. §§5497(a)(1), (2)(A)–(B). And, it specifies the
objects for which the Bureau can use those funds—to “pay the
expenses of the Bureau in carrying out its duties and
responsibilities.” §5497(c)(1).

															Further, the Bureau’s funding mechanism fits
comfortably with the First Congress’ appropriations practice. In
design, the Bureau’s authorization to draw an amount that the
Director deems reasonably necessary to carry out the agency’s
responsibilities, subject to a cap, is similar to the First
Congress’ lump-sum appropriations. And, the commission- and
fee-based appropriations that supplied the Customs Service and Post
Office provided standing authorizations to expend public money in
the same way that the Bureau’s funding mechanism does.

															For these reasons, we conclude that the statute
that authorizes the Bureau to draw funds from the combined earnings
of the Federal Reserve System is an “Appropriatio[n] made by Law.”
We therefore hold that the requirements of the Appropriations
Clause are satisfied.

															III

															The associations make three principal
arguments for why the Bureau’s funding mechanism violates the
Appropriations Clause, each of which attempts to build additional
requirements into the meaning of an “Appropriatio[n] made by Law.”
None is persuasive.

															A

															At the outset, the associations argue that the
Bureau’s funding is not “drawn . . . in Consequence of
Appropriations made by Law” because the agency, rather than
Congress, decides the amount of annual funding that it draws from
the Federal Reserve System. This argument proceeds from a mistaken
premise. Congress determined the amount of the Bureau’s annual
funding by imposing a statutory cap. The Bureau’s funding statute
provides that “the amount that shall be transferred to the Bureau
in each fiscal year shall not exceed” 12 percent “of the total
operating expenses of the Federal Reserve System” as reported in
2009 and adjusted for inflation. §5497(a)(2). The only sense in
which the Bureau decides its own funding, then, is by exercising
its discretion to draw less than the statutory cap. But, as we have
explained, “sums not exceeding” appropriations, which provided the
Executive with the same discretion, were commonplace immediately
after the founding. Supra, at 12–13. Thus, we cannot
conclude that Congress violated the Appropriations Clause by
permitting the Bureau to decide how much funding to draw up to a
cap.

															B

															Next, the associations suggest that the
Bureau’s funding statute is not a valid appropriation because it is
not time limited. On their reading, the Appropriations Clause
requires both Chambers of Congress to periodically agree on an
agency’s funding, which ensures that each Chamber reserves the
power to unilaterally block those funding measures through
inaction. The Bureau’s funding mechanism, the associations insist,
inverts this baseline by allowing it to draw funds—forever—unless
both Chambers of Congress step in and affirmatively prevent the
agency from doing so.

															But, the Constitution’s text suggests that, at
least in some circumstances, Congress can make standing
appropriations. The Constitution expressly provides that “no
Appropriation of Money” to support an army “shall be for a longer
Term than two Years.” Art. I, §8, cl. 12. Hamilton explained
that this restriction ensures that, for the army, Congress cannot
“vest in the Executive department . . . permanent funds”
and must instead “once at least in every two years . . .
deliberate upon the propriety of keeping a military force on foot,”
“come to a new resolution on the point,” and “declare their sense
of the matter, by a formal vote in the face of their constituents.”
The Federalist No. 26, p. 143 (E. Scott ed. 1898). The Framers were
thus aware of the dynamic that the associations highlight, but they
did not explicitly limit the duration of appropriations for other
purposes.

															The First Congress’ practice confirms this
understanding. Recall that the appropriations that supplied funding
to the Customs Service and the Post Office were not time limited.
Supra, at 13–14. The associations resist the analogy to the
Post Office and other fee-based agencies, arguing that such
agencies do not enjoy the same level of fiscal independence as the
Bureau. Fee-based agencies, the associations reason, “could not
demand funds from the federal fisc, but rather needed to persuade
the people they served to pay them, and the public could refuse to
purchase to influence their conduct.” Brief for Respondents 35. The
associations, however, make no attempt to explain why the
possibility that the public’s choices could restrain fee-based
agencies’ revenue is relevant to the question whether a law
complies with the constitutional imperative that there be an
appropriation.

															C

															Finally, the associations contend that the
Bureau’s funding mechanism provides a blueprint for destroying the
separation of powers, and that it invites tyranny by allowing the
Executive to operate free of any meaningful fiscal check. If the
Bureau’s funding mechanism is consistent with the Appropriations
Clause, the associations reason, then Congress could do the same
for any—or every—civilian executive agency. And that, they
conclude, would be the very unification of the sword and purse that
the Appropriations Clause forbids.

															The associations err by reducing the power of
the purse to only the principle expressed in the Appropriations
Clause. To be sure, the Appropriations Clause presupposes Congress’
powers over the purse. But, its phrasing and location in the
Constitution make clear that it is not itself the source of those
powers. The Appropriations Clause is phrased as a limitation: “No
Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of
Appropriations made by Law.” Art. I, §9. And, it is placed within a
section of other such limitations. Compare ibid. (“No Bill
of Attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed”) and
ibid. (“No Tax or Duty shall be laid on Articles exported
from any State”), with §8 (“The Congress shall have Power To
. . . ”). The associations offer no defensible argument
that the Appropriations Clause requires more than a law that
authorizes the disbursement of specified funds for identified
purposes. Without such a theory, the associations’ Appropriations
Clause challenge must fail. See Haaland v. Brackeen,
599 U.S. 255, 277–278 (2023).

															IV

															The dissent’s theory fares no better. The
dissent accepts that the question in this case is ultimately about
the meaning of “Appropriations.” Post, at 6. It faults us
for consulting dictionaries to ascertain the original public
meaning of that word, insisting instead that “Appropriations” is a
“term of art whose meaning has been fleshed out by centuries of
history.” Ibid. But, as we have explained at length, both
preratification and postratification appropriations practice
support our source-and-purpose understanding. Supra, at
8–14. What is more, the dissent never offers a competing
understanding of what the word “Appropriations” means. After
winding its way through English, Colonial, and early American
history about the struggle for popular control of the purse, the
dissent declares that “the Appropriations Clause demands
legislative control over the source and disposition of the money
used to finance Government operations and projects.” Post,
at 17. The dissent never connects its summary of history back to
the word “Appropriations.” And, even setting that problem aside, it
is unclear why the dissent’s theory leads to a different outcome:
Congress controls the “source and disposition of the money used to
finance Government operations and projects” by enacting a law that
identifies the source of public funds and authorizes the
expenditure of those funds for designated purposes.

															The dissent’s rendition of history largely
ignores the historical evidence that bears most directly on the
meaning of “Appropriations” at the founding—preratification
appropriations laws. For example, the dissent spends pages
recounting how Parliament secured fiscal supremacy and wielded that
power to superintend the King. See post, at 7–11. Although
that history is a helpful starting point, see supra, at 8–9,
it at most explains why appropriations must be “made by Law”—not
what it means for the legislature to make an “Appropriation.” The
dissent does not meaningfully grapple with the many parliamentary
appropriations laws that preserved a broad range of fiscal
discretion for the King. See supra, at 9–10. It makes no
attempt to explain “sums not exceeding” appropriations. See
ibid. And, the dissent brushes aside the civil list,
asserting that it “ ‘presented a constitutional problem in the
conflict between the principle of the independence of the Crown and
the principle of parliamentary control of finance.’ ”
Post, at 12 (quoting Reitan 320). The problem was that the
King claimed absolute power to use the sums granted in the civil
list as he pleased and regularly spent in excess of the allotted
amount. See id., at 320, 324–329. But, the dissent never
explains why the reforms that Parliament adopted in response to
these abuses bear on whether the law establishing the civil list
was an “appropriation.”

															The dissent’s treatment of early American
history does not advance its point either. It highlights the
undisputed point that colonial and state legislative bodies
exercised the power of the purse, post, at 13, while
sidestepping the discretionary and open-ended appropriations they
enacted, supra, at 10–11. The dissent quibbles with the
open-ended appropriations laws that we rely on, speculating that
state constitutions somehow constrained the breadth of those laws.
Post, at 16–17, n. 13. But, the dissent never explains how
these constitutional provisions informed what it meant for state
legislative bodies to make an “appropriation” and, in any event,
its critique misses the point: It was commonplace for
preratification appropriations laws to be open-ended in a way that
is not consistent with the specificity that the dissent’s theory
appears to require.

															When the dissent turns to postratification
history, it engages with several appropriations laws enacted by the
First Congress. The dissent acknowledges, as it must, that the fee-
and commission-based funding schemes for the Customs Service and
Post Office show that Congress exercised broad discretion over how
to appropriate money. Post, at 15–16. To square these
funding schemes with its understanding of the Appropriations
Clause, the dissent points out that Congress required “fees in
excess of what was needed to defray the cost of providing services
be turned over to the Treasury.” Post, at 16. This
requirement, the dissent reasons, “ensured that Congress maintained
control over the ways in which [the appropriated] money was spent.”
Ibid. But, if what matters is that Congress controls how
funds are spent, then we are all in agreement—appropriations must
designate the purposes for which money can be spent.

															Even under the dissent’s “legislative control”
theory, its attempt to distinguish the Customs Service and the Post
Office from the Bureau is not convincing. The dissent points out
that Congress had control over the Customs Service, for instance,
because Customs had a “carefully delineated mission” and “early
tariff Acts spelled out in excruciating detail the various fees”
customs officers could collect, as well as the salaries the
officers could be paid from those receipts. Post, at 19–20.
According to the dissent, the Bureau is different because “[i]ts
powers are broad and vast,” “[i]t does not collect fees,” and “it
is permitted to keep and invest surplus funds.” Post, at 20.
But, it is unclear why these differences matter under the dissent’s
theory. After all, to make a valid appropriation, Congress must
designate the objects for which the appropriated funds may be
used—as it did here. See 12 U. S. C. §5497(c)(1).
Although there may be other constitutional checks on Congress’
authority to create and fund an administrative agency, specifying
the source and purpose is all the control the Appropriations Clause
requires.

															V

															The statute that authorizes the Bureau to draw
money from the combined earnings of the Federal Reserve System to
carry out its duties satisfies the Appropriations Clause.
Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.

															It is so ordered.

