::decision_cite:: 22-429
::decision_name::  Acheson Hotels, LLC v. Laufer
::decision_year:: 2023
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–429

															_________________

															ACHESON HOTELS, LLC, PETITIONER v.
DEBORAH LAUFER

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the first circuit

															[December 5, 2023]

															

															Justice Thomas, concurring in the
judgment.

															Deborah Laufer has filed hundreds of lawsuits
against hotels she has no intention of visiting, claiming that
their websites lack accessibility information mandated by a federal
regulation. At both parties’ request, this Court agreed to answer a
question that has divided the Courts of Appeals: whether plaintiffs
like Laufer have standing to bring these claims. The Court decides
not to decide that question because, after briefing began, Laufer
voluntarily dismissed her claim in the District Court. I would
answer this important and recurring question, which, as all agree,
we have the authority to do. And, I conclude that Laufer lacks
standing.

															I

															Title III of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) prohibits discrimination “on the
basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of
any place of public accommodation,” such as a hotel. 42
U. S. C. §§12182(a), 12181(7)(A). Title III defines
discrimination to include “a failure to make reasonable
modifications” when “necessary to afford . . . services
. . . or accommodations to individuals with
disabilities.” §12182(b)(2)(A)(ii). To enforce the ADA’s
prohibition on discrimination, Title III creates a private
cause of action that permits “any person who is being subjected to
discrimination on the basis of disability” to sue for violations.
§12188(a)(1). Only injunctive relief and attorney’s fees are
available to private litigants. Ibid.; see also §§12205,
2000a–3(a). The Attorney General, however, may obtain damages or
assess civil penalties. §12188(b)(2).

															The Department of Justice promulgated a
regulation known as the Reservation Rule to aid in the
implementation of the ADA’s prohibition on discrimination. The rule
requires hotels to “[i]dentify and describe accessible features
. . . in enough detail to reasonably permit individuals
with disabilities to assess independently whether a given hotel or
guest room meets his or her accessibility needs.” 28 CFR
§36.302(e)(1)(ii) (2022). The rule also applies to reservations
made “through a third party.” Ibid.

															Laufer, who is wheelchair bound, is a
self-described “tester” of compliance with the Reservation Rule.
From her home in Florida, Laufer scours the internet for hotel
websites that do not contain the required accessibility
information. When she finds a deficient website, she sues the
hotel. She often offers to settle immediately for $10,000 in
attorney’s fees and corrective action. See Report and
Recommendation in In re Gillespie, No. 1:21–mc–14 (D
Md., June 30, 2023), ECF Doc. 13, p. 5; No. 1:21–mc–14 (July 5,
2023), ECF Doc. 14, p. 1, vacated on other grounds by In re
Gillespie, 2023 WL 7548181 (CA4, Nov. 14, 2023)
(per curiam). In the past five years, Laufer has filed
over 600 lawsuits against hotels.

															In this case, Laufer visited the website of a
bed and breakfast located in Maine, the Coast Village Inn. She
filed suit against the Coast Village Inn’s owner, Acheson Hotels,
for failing to provide sufficient accessibility information. She
also contended that 13 third-party booking websites, such as
Expedia, failed to provide accessibility information for the Coast
Village Inn. Laufer initially alleged that she was planning to
visit the Coast Village Inn as part of a cross-country trip from
Florida to Maine to Colorado. But she later disclaimed any intent
to travel to Maine (or the Coast Village Inn). 50 F. 4th 259, 267,
n. 3 (CA1 2022); see also Brief for Appellant in No. 21–1410
(CA1), p. 4, n. 1.

															The District Court concluded that Laufer lacked
standing and dismissed her complaint. The First Circuit reversed,
relying primarily on this Court’s holding in Havens Realty
Corp. v. Coleman, 455
U.S. 363 (1982), that a tester had standing to sue under the
Fair Housing Act. When Acheson Hotels petitioned for certiorari,
Laufer agreed. She highlighted that the Circuits were split as to
her standing and argued that “clarity from this Court is badly
needed.” Brief in Opposition 1. After we granted certiorari and set
the case for argument, Laufer filed a notice in the District Court
of her voluntary dismissal of her claim with prejudice. And, even
though Acheson Hotels (and several amici) had already filed
briefs, Laufer requested that we dismiss this case as moot. We
denied her request at that time, but agreed to consider it at oral
argument. The case has been fully briefed and the Court has heard
argument on the merits. Today, however, the majority opts to
resolve this case on mootness. We can—and should—address the
question on which we granted certiorari.

															II

															I would not dismiss this case as moot. There
is no question that we have authority to address Laufer’s standing.
Standing and mootness are both jurisdictional doctrines that flow
from Article III. And, there is no mandatory “sequencing of
jurisdictional issues.” Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil
Co., 526 U.S.
574, 584 (1999). Indeed, as the majority and Laufer herself
acknowledge, we have the discretion to determine either
“ ‘threshold groun[d] for denying audience to a case on the
merits.’ ” Sinochem Int’l Co. v. Malaysia Int’l
Shipping Corp., 549 U.S.
422, 431 (2007) (quoting Ruhrgas, 526 U. S., at
585); ante, at 2–3; Suggestion of Mootness 9 (“[T]his Court
has discretion to resolve either issue first”).

															We should address Laufer’s standing, rather than
resolve this case on mootness. As an analytical matter, whether
Laufer had standing the day she filed her suit is logically
antecedent to whether her later actions mooted the case. More
importantly, whether Laufer has standing to bring her Reservation
Rule claims is a recurring question that only this Court can
definitively resolve. As the majority explains, “Laufer has
singlehandedly generated a circuit split” on her standing.
Ante, at 1. And Laufer is far from the only Reservation Rule
tester. See, e.g., Harty v. West Point
Realty, Inc., 28 F. 4th 435 (CA2 2022); Love v.
Marriott Ownership Resorts, Inc., No. 20–cv–7523 (ND Cal.,
Mar. 29, 2021); Sarwar v. Om Sai, LLC, No.
2:20–cv–483 (D Me., May 18, 2021). Beyond answering this question
for our colleagues on the Courts of Appeal and District Courts, we
should answer it for Acheson Hotels, which has spent significant
time and resources fully briefing a question that will now go
unanswered.

															What is more, the circumstances strongly suggest
strategic behavior on Laufer’s part. After this case was well
underway in this Court, Laufer filed a notice with the District
Court voluntarily dismissing her claim with prejudice, ostensibly
because another court sanctioned one of her attorneys for
misconduct related to some of Laufer’s ADA cases. But the attorney
in question had nothing to do with the case before us. Suggestion
of Mootness 3 (acknowledging at- issue attorney “had no involvement
in the present case before this Court”). Laufer’s logic is thus
that she dismissed her claim—and the Court should no longer address
whether she had standing—because an attorney she hired in an
entirely different case engaged in misconduct. An unrelated
attorney’s conduct does nothing to change the analysis required to
determine a plaintiff ’s standing. Laufer admits as much,
arguing only that the alleged misconduct “could distract from the
merits of her ADA claims and everything she has sought to achieve
for persons with disabilities like herself.” Id., at 4. I
would not reward Laufer’s transparent tactic for evading our
review. Although the majority leaves the door open to “exercise
[its] discretion differently in a future case,” we have needlessly
invited litigants to follow Laufer’s path to manipulate our docket.
Ante, at 3. We should not resolve this case about standing
based upon mootness of Laufer’s own making.[1]

															III

															Turning to the question presented, Laufer
lacks standing to bring her ADA claims. Article III of the
Constitution extends the “judicial Power” to all “Cases” and
“Controversies.” Standing doctrine serves to “limi[t] the ‘judicial
power’ to ‘ “cases and controversies of the sort traditionally
amenable to, and resolved by, the judicial process.” ’ ”
Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins, 578 U.S. 330, 343 (2016)
(Thomas, J., concurring) (quoting Vermont Agency of Natural
Resources v. United States ex rel. Stevens, 529 U.S.
765, 774 (2000)). In doing so, standing “preserve[s] separation
of powers by preventing the Judiciary’s entanglement in disputes
that are primarily political in nature.” Spokeo, 578
U. S., at 344.

															As I have previously explained, “[t]he mere
filing of a complaint in federal court . . . does not a
case (or controversy) make.” TransUnion LLC v.
Ramirez, 594 U. S. ___, ___ (2021) (Thomas, J.,
dissenting) (slip op., at 5). Our “judicial power [does not extend]
to every violation of the constitution [or law] which may possibly
take place, but to ‘a case in law or in equity,’ in which a right,
under such law, is asserted in a Court of justice.” Cohens
v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 405 (1821). To have standing, a
plaintiff must assert a violation of his rights. See Lujan
v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S.
555, 563 (1992) (“[T]he party seeking review [must] be himself
among the injured” (internal quotation marks omitted)). After all,
“[t]he province of the court is, solely, to decide on the rights of
individuals.” Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 170
(1803). It is not to address a plaintiff ’s claim of “only
harm to his and every citizen’s interest in proper application of
the . . . laws.” Lujan, 504 U. S., at
573.[2]

															Laufer lacks standing because her claim does not
assert a violation of a right under the ADA, much less a violation
of her rights. Her claim alleges that Acheson Hotels violated the
ADA by failing to include on its website the accessibility
information that the Reservation Rule requires. Yet, the ADA
provides that “[n]o individual shall be discriminated against on
the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the
. . . services . . . of any place of public
accommodation.” 42 U. S. C. §12182(a). In other words,
the ADA prohibits only discrimination based on disability—it does
not create a right to information.

															Laufer’s ADA claim is thus different from the
tester’s claim under the Fair Housing Act that the Court addressed
in Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455
U.S. 363. In contrast to the ADA, the Fair Housing Act
explicitly prohibits “represent[ing] to any person because of race
. . . that any dwelling is not available for inspection,
sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.”
§3604(d). Accordingly, when Havens Realty told a black tester that
no apartments were available but told a white tester that it had
vacancies, the Court found that the black tester had standing to
sue. The Court explained that the statute created “a legal right to
truthful information about available housing.” Id., at 373.
The black tester had been personally denied that truthful
information, so she had standing to bring her claim. Havens
Realty thus has no bearing on Laufer’s standing as a tester of
compliance with the ADA, which provides no such statutory right to
information.

															Laufer points to the Reservation Rule, alleging
that it creates an entitlement to accessibility information. But
even assuming a regulation could—and did—create such a right,
Laufer asserts no violation of her own rights with regard to that
information. Laufer does not even harbor “ ‘some day’
intentions” of traveling to Maine to visit the Coast Village Inn.
Lujan, 504 U. S., at 564. Her lack of intent to visit
the hotel or even book a hotel room elsewhere in Maine eviscerates
any connection to her purported legal interest in the accessibility
information required by the Reservation Rule. To put it in the
“more pedestrian terms” used by then-Judge Scalia, standing asks
“ ‘What’s it to you?’ ” The Doctrine of Standing as an
Essential Element of the Separation of Powers, 17 Suffolk U.
L. Rev. 881, 882 (1983). Acheson Hotels’ failure to provide
accessibility information on its website is nothing to Laufer,
because she disclaimed any intent to visit the hotel.

															Rather than assert a violation of her own
rights, Laufer casts herself in the role of a private attorney
general, surfing the web to ensure hotels’ compliance with the
Reservation Rule. Laufer has described herself as “an advocate on
behalf of both [her]self and other similarly situated disabled
persons.” App. 17a. She admits that, “[a]s a tester, [she] visit[s]
hotel online reservation services to ascertain whether they are in
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.” Ibid.
As a public official would do, Laufer even monitors those hotel
websites she has found lacking. She uses “a system” to track each
of the hundreds of hotels she has sued. Id., at 19a. “Once a
case is settled, [she] mark[s] the date . . . when the
defendant has agreed to fix its websites,” and on that date, she
“revisit[s]” the website to ensure the hotel has complied.
Id., at 19a–20a.

															Laufer sues “not to enforce specific legal
obligations whose violation works a direct harm” on her, but to
force hotels to comply with the Reservation Rule. Allen v.
Wright, 468 U.S.
737, 761 (1984). “Vindicating the public interest
. . . is the function of Congress and the Chief
Executive,” however, not private plaintiffs. Lujan, 504
U. S., at 576. The President is tasked with the duty to “take
Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,” U. S. Const.,
Art. II, §3, and executive branch officials have discretion to
choose whether and how to enforce the law, see Heckler v.
Chaney, 470 U.S.
821, 831–832 (1985). Yet, as Judge Newsom has explained,
“[t]esters exercise the sort of proactive enforcement discretion
properly reserved to the Executive Branch,” with none of the
corresponding accountability. Laufer v. Arpan, LLC,
29 F. 4th 1268, 1291 (CA11 2022) (concurring opinion).

															This case exemplifies the dangers. An official
could have informed Acheson Hotels that its website failed to
comply with the Reservation Rule, and Acheson Hotels could have
updated its website to explain it had no accessible rooms. Laufer,
however, chose to “enforce” each technical violation of the ADA she
could uncover with a lawsuit. Because she is a private plaintiff,
no discretion was required or exercised. And, of course, Laufer has
been willing to forgo her suits if a hotel pays up, even though the
ADA provides for no damages for private litigants. Laufer’s
aggressive efforts to personally impose financial penalties for
violations of the Reservation Rule go far beyond the role that
Congress envisioned for private plaintiffs under the ADA. Without a
violation of her own rights, Laufer lacks standing to sue hotels
under the ADA. Ensuring and monitoring compliance with the law is a
function of a Government official, not a private person who does
not assert a violation of her own rights.

															IV

															Standing ensures that courts decide disputes
over violations of a person’s rights, not a defendant’s compliance
with the law in the abstract. Because Laufer has not asserted a
violation of a right owed to her, she has no standing to bring her
Reservation Rule claims. The Court should not have avoided reaching
that conclusion due to Laufer’s eleventh-hour tactics. I
respectfully concur in the judgment because I would vacate and
remand, with instructions to dismiss for lack of standing.

Notes
1
 The majority vacates the
opinion below in Laufer’s favor, and rightly so. See United
States v. Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U.S.
36 (1950).
2
 The traditional
distinction between public and private rights shapes the contours
of the judicial power. See Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins,
578 U.S. 330, 344 (2016) (opinion of Thomas, J.); Wellness Int’l
Network, Ltd. v. Sharif, 575 U.S. 665, 713 (2015)
(Thomas, J., dissenting). Private rights, such as the classic
rights to life, liberty, and property, were “so called because they
‘appertain[ed] and belong[ed] to particular men . . .
merely as individuals,’ not ‘to them as members of society [or]
standing in various relations to each other’—that is, not dependent
upon the will of the government.” Id., at 713 (quoting 1
W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 119
(1765)). By contrast, public rights “belon[g] to the public as a
whole.” B&B Hardware, Inc. v. Hargis Industries,
Inc., 575 U.S. 138, 171 (2015) (Thomas, J., dissenting); see
also 4 Blackstone, at 5 (1772). And “quasi-private rights, or
statutory entitlements, are those ‘ “privileges” ’ or
‘ “franchises” ’ that are bestowed by the government on
individuals.” B&B Hardware, 575 U. S., at 171. We
need not classify Laufer’s legal interests because, regardless of
which type of right a plaintiff asserts, he must allege “the
violation of his private legal right” or his own
injury based on a violation of a public right. Spokeo, 578
U. S., at 344 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (emphasis added); see
also A. Woolhandler & C. Nelson, Does History Defeat Standing
Doctrine? 102 Mich. L. Rev. 689, 723 (2004); C. Nelson, Vested
Rights, “Franchises,” and the Separation of Powers, 169 U. Pa.
L. Rev. 1429, 1433, 1437–1438 (2021). For the reasons
provided, Laufer has not alleged a violation of her rights or a
cognizable injury to herself.


