::decision_cite:: 22-451
::decision_name::  Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 22–451 and 22–1219

															_________________

															LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES, et al.,
PETITIONERS

															22–451v.

															GINA RAIMONDO, SECRETARY OF COMMERCE,
et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															

															RELENTLESS, INC., et al.,
PETITIONERS

															22–1219v.

															DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the first circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															Justice Gorsuch, concurring.

															In disputes between individuals and the
government about the meaning of a federal law, federal courts have
traditionally sought to offer independent judgments about “what the
law is” without favor to either side. Marbury v.
Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177 (1803). Beginning in the
mid-1980s, however, this Court experimented with a radically
different approach. Applying Chevron deference, judges began
deferring to the views of executive agency officials about the
meaning of federal statutes. See Chevron U. S. A.
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,
467 U.S.
837 (1984). With time, the error of this approach became widely
appreciated. So much so that this Court has refused to apply
Chevron deference since 2016. Today, the Court places a
tombstone on Chevron no one can miss. In doing so, the Court
returns judges to interpretive rules that have guided federal
courts since the Nation’s founding. I write separately to address
why the proper application of the doctrine of stare decisis
supports that course.

															I

															A

															Today, the phrase “common law judge” may call
to mind a judicial titan of the past who brilliantly devised new
legal rules on his own. The phrase “stare decisis” might
conjure up a sense that judges who come later in time are strictly
bound to follow the work of their predecessors. But neither of
those intuitions fairly describes the traditional common-law
understanding of the judge’s role or the doctrine of stare
decisis.

															At common law, a judge’s charge to decide cases
was not usually understood as a license to make new law. For much
of England’s early history, different rulers and different legal
systems prevailed in different regions. As England consolidated
into a single kingdom governed by a single legal system, the
judge’s task was to examine those pre-existing legal traditions and
apply in the disputes that came to him those legal rules that were
“common to the whole land and to all Englishmen.” F. Maitland,
Equity, Also the Forms of Action at Common Law 2 (1929). That was
“common law” judging.

															This view of the judge’s role had consequences
for the authority due judicial decisions. Because a judge’s job was
to find and apply the law, not make it, the “opinion of the judge”
and “the law” were not considered “one and the same thing.” 1 W.
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 71 (1765)
(Blackstone) (emphasis deleted). A judge’s decision might bind the
parties to the case at hand. M. Hale, The History and Analysis of
the Common Law of England 68 (1713) (Hale). But none of that meant
the judge had the power to “make a Law properly so called” for
society at large, “for that only the King and Parliament can do.”
Ibid.

															Other consequences followed for the role
precedent played in future judicial proceedings. Because past
decisions represented something “less than a Law,” they did not
bind future judges. Ibid. At the same time, as Matthew Hale
put it, a future judge could give a past decision “Weight” as
“Evidence” of the law. Ibid. Expressing the same idea,
William Blackstone conceived of judicial precedents as “evidence”
of “the common law.” 1 Blackstone 69, 71. And much like other forms
of evidence, precedents at common law were thought to vary in the
weight due them. Some past decisions might supply future courts
with considerable guidance. But others might be entitled to lesser
weight, not least because judges are no less prone to error than
anyone else and they may sometimes “mistake” what the law demands.
Id., at 71 (emphasis deleted). In cases like that, both men
thought, a future judge should not rotely repeat a past mistake but
instead “vindicate” the law “from misrepresentation.” Id.,
at 70.

															When examining past decisions as evidence of the
law, common law judges did not, broadly speaking, afford
overwhelming weight to any “single precedent.” J. Baker, An
Introduction to English Legal History 209–210 (5th ed. 2019).
Instead, a prior decision’s persuasive force depended in large
measure on its “Consonancy and Congruity with Resolutions and
Decisions of former Times.” Hale 68. An individual decision might
reflect the views of one court at one moment in time, but a
consistent line of decisions representing the wisdom of many minds
across many generations was generally considered stronger evidence
of the law’s meaning. Ibid.

															With this conception of precedent in mind, Lord
Mansfield cautioned against elevating “particular cases” above the
“general principles” that “run through the cases, and govern the
decision of them.” Rust v. Cooper, 2 Cowp. 629, 632,
98 Eng. Rep. 1277, 1279 (K. B. 1777). By discarding aberrational
rulings and pursuing instead the mainstream of past decisions, he
observed, the common law tended over time to “wor[k] itself pure.”
Omychund v. Barker, 1 Atk. 22, 33, 26 Eng. Rep. 15,
23 (Ch. 1744) (emphasis deleted). Reflecting similar thinking,
Edmund Burke offered five principles for the evaluation of past
judicial decisions: “They ought to be shewn; first, to be numerous
and not scattered here and there;—secondly, concurrent and not
contradictory and mutually destructive;—thirdly, to be made in good
and constitutional times;—fourthly, not to be made to serve an
occasion;—and fifthly, to be agreeable to the general tenor of
legal principles.” Speech of Dec. 23, 1790, in 3 The Speeches of
the Right Honourable Edmund Burke 513 (1816).

															Not only did different decisions carry different
weight, so did different language within a decision. An opinion’s
holding and the reasoning essential to it (the ratio
decidendi) merited careful attention. Dicta, stray remarks, and
digressions warranted less weight. See N. Duxbury, The Intricacies
of Dicta and Dissent 19–24 (2021) (Duxbury). These were no more
than “the vapours and fumes of law.” F. Bacon, The Lord Keeper’s
Speech in the Exchequer (1617), in 2 The Works of Francis Bacon 478
(B. Montagu ed. 1887) (Bacon).

															That is not to say those “vapours” were
worthless. Often dicta might provide the parties to a particular
dispute a “fuller understanding of the court’s decisional path or
related areas of concern.” B. Garner et al., The Law of
Judicial Precedent 65 (2016) (Precedent). Dicta might also provide
future courts with a source of “thoughtful advice.” Ibid.
But future courts had to be careful not to treat every “hasty
expression . . . as a serious and deliberate opinion.”
Steel v. Houghton, 1 Bl. H. 51, 53, 126 Eng. Rep. 32,
33 (C. P. 1788). To do so would work an “injustice to [the]
memory” of their predecessors who could not expect judicial remarks
issued in one context to apply perfectly in others, perhaps
especially ones they could not foresee. Ibid. Also, the
limits of the adversarial process, a distinctive feature of English
law, had to be borne in mind. When a single judge or a small panel
reached a decision in a case, they did so based on the factual
record and legal arguments the parties at hand have chosen to
develop. Attuned to those constraints, future judges had to proceed
with an open mind to the possibility that different facts and
different legal arguments might dictate different outcomes in later
disputes. See Duxbury 19–24.

															B

															Necessarily, this represents just a quick
sketch of traditional common-law understandings of the judge’s role
and the place of precedent in it. It focuses, too, on the
horizontal, not vertical, force of judicial precedents. But there
are good reasons to think that the common law’s understandings of
judges and precedent outlined above crossed the Atlantic and
informed the nature of the “judicial Power” the Constitution vests
in federal courts. Art. III, §1.

															Not only was the Constitution adopted against
the backdrop of these understandings and, in light of that alone,
they may provide evidence of what the framers meant when they spoke
of the “judicial Power.” Many other, more specific provisions in
the Constitution reflect much the same distinction between
lawmaking and lawfinding functions the common law did. The
Constitution provides that its terms may be amended only through
certain prescribed democratic processes. Art. V. It vests the power
to enact federal legislation exclusively in the people’s elected
representatives in Congress. Art. I, §1. Meanwhile, the
Constitution describes the judicial power as the power to resolve
cases and controversies. Art. III, §2, cl. 1. As well, it
delegates that authority to life-tenured judges, see §1, an
assignment that would have made little sense if judges could usurp
lawmaking powers vested in periodically elected representatives.
But one that makes perfect sense if what is sought is a neutral
party “to interpret and apply” the law without fear or favor in a
dispute between others. 2 The Works of James Wilson 161 (J. Andrews
ed. 1896) (Wilson); see Osborn v. Bank of United
States, 9 Wheat. 738, 866 (1824).

															The constrained view of the judicial power that
runs through our Constitution carries with it familiar
implications, ones the framers readily acknowledged. James Madison,
for example, proclaimed that it would be a “fallacy” to suggest
that judges or their precedents could “repeal or alter” the
Constitution or the laws of the United States. Letter to N. Trist
(Dec. 1831), in 9 The Writings of James Madison 477 (G. Hunt ed.
1910). A court’s opinion, James Wilson added, may be thought of as
“effective la[w]” “[a]s to the parties.” Wilson 160–161. But as in
England, Wilson said, a prior judicial decision could serve in a
future dispute only as “evidence” of the law’s proper construction.
Id., at 160; accord, 1 J. Kent, Commentaries on American Law
442–443 (1826).

															The framers also recognized that the judicial
power described in our Constitution implies, as the judicial power
did in England, a power (and duty) of discrimination when it comes
to assessing the “evidence” embodied in past decisions. So, for
example, Madison observed that judicial rulings “repeatedly
confirmed ” may supply better evidence of the law’s
meaning than isolated or aberrant ones. Letter to C. Ingersoll
(June 1831), in 4 Letters and Other Writings of James Madison 184
(1867) (emphasis added). Extending the thought, Thomas Jefferson
believed it would often take “numerous decisions” for the meaning
of new statutes to become truly “settled.” Letter to S. Jones (July
1809), in 12 The Writings of Thomas Jefferson 299 (A. Bergh ed.
1907).

															From the start, too, American courts recognized
that not everything found in a prior decision was entitled to equal
weight. As Chief Justice Marshall warned, “It is a maxim not to be
disregarded, that general expressions, in every opinion, are to be
taken in connection with the case in which those expressions are
used.” Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 399 (1821).
To the extent a past court offered views “beyond the case,” those
expressions “may be respected” in a later case “but ought not to
control the judgment.” Ibid. One “obvious” reason for this,
Marshall continued, had to do with the limits of the adversarial
process we inherited from England: Only “[t]he question actually
before the Court is investigated with care, and considered in its
full extent. Other principles which may serve to illustrate it, are
considered in their relation to the case decided, but their
possible bearing on all other cases is seldom completely
investigated.” Id., at 399–400.

															Abraham Lincoln championed these traditional
understandings in his debates with Stephen Douglas. Douglas took
the view that a single decision of this Court—no matter how
flawed—could definitively resolve a contested issue for everyone
and all time. Those who thought otherwise, he said, “aim[ed] a
deadly blow to our whole Republican system of government.” Speech
at Springfield, Ill. (June 26, 1857), in 2 The Collected Works of
Abraham Lincoln 401 (R. Basler ed. 1953) (Lincoln Speech). But
Lincoln knew better. While accepting that judicial decisions
“absolutely determine” the rights of the parties to a court’s
judgment, he refused to accept that any single judicial decision
could “fully settl[e]” an issue, particularly when that decision
departs from the Constitution. Id., at 400–401. In cases
such as these, Lincoln explained, “it is not resistance, it is not
factious, it is not even disrespectful, to treat [the decision] as
not having yet quite established a settled doctrine for the
country.” Id., at 401.

															After the Civil War, the Court echoed some of
these same points. It stressed that every statement in a judicial
opinion “must be taken in connection with its immediate context,”
In re Ayers, 123 U.S.
443, 488 (1887), and stray “remarks” must not be elevated above
the written law, see The Belfast, 7 Wall. 624, 641 (1869);
see also, e.g., Trebilcock v. Wilson,
12 Wall. 687, 692–693 (1872); Mason v. Eldred, 6
Wall. 231, 236–238 (1868). During Chief Justice Chase’s tenure, it
seems a Justice writing the Court’s majority opinion would
generally work alone and present his work orally and in summary
form to his colleagues at conference, which meant that other
Justices often did not even review the opinion prior to
publication. 6 C. Fairman, History of the Supreme Court of the
United States 69–70 (1971). The Court could proceed in this way
because it understood that a single judicial opinion may resolve a
“case or controversy,” and in so doing it may make “effective law”
for the parties, but it does not legislate for the whole of the
country and is not to be confused with laws that do.

															C

															From all this, I see at least three lessons
about the doctrine of stare decisis relevant to the decision
before us today. Each concerns a form of judicial humility.

															First, a past decision may bind the
parties to a dispute, but it provides this Court no authority in
future cases to depart from what the Constitution or laws of the
United States ordain. Instead, the Constitution promises, the
American people are sovereign and they alone may, through
democratically responsive processes, amend our foundational charter
or revise federal legislation. Unelected judges enjoy no such
power. Part I–B, supra.

															Recognizing as much, this Court has often said
that stare decisis is not an “ ‘inexorable
command.’ ” State Oil Co. v. Khan, 522 U.S.
3, 20 (1997). And from time to time it has found it necessary
to correct its past mistakes. When it comes to correcting errors of
constitutional interpretation, the Court has stressed the
importance of doing so, for they can be corrected otherwise only
through the amendment process. See, e.g., Franchise Tax
Bd. of Cal. v. Hyatt, 587 U.S. 230, 248 (2019). When it
comes to fixing errors of statutory interpretation, the Court has
proceeded perhaps more circumspectly. But in that field, too, it
has overruled even longstanding but “flawed” decisions. See,
e.g., Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc. v.
PSKS, Inc., 551 U.S.
877, 904, 907 (2007).

															Recent history illustrates all this. During the
tenures of Chief Justices Warren and Burger, it seems this Court
overruled an average of around three cases per Term, including
roughly 50 statutory precedents between the 1960s and 1980s alone.
See W. Eskridge, Overruling Statutory Precedents, 76 Geo.
L. J. 1361, 1427–1434 (1988) (collecting cases). Many of these
decisions came in settings no less consequential than today’s. In
recent years, we have not approached the pace set by our
predecessors, overruling an average of just one or two prior
decisions each Term.[1] But the
point remains: Judicial decisions inconsistent with the written law
do not inexorably control.

															Second, another lesson tempers the first.
While judicial decisions may not supersede or revise the
Constitution or federal statutory law, they merit our “respect as
embodying the considered views of those who have come before.”
Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U.S. 83, 105 (2020). As a
matter of professional responsibility, a judge must not only avoid
confusing his writings with the law. When a case comes before him,
he must also weigh his view of what the law demands against the
thoughtful views of his predecessors. After all, “[p]recedent is a
way of accumulating and passing down the learning of past
generations, a font of established wisdom richer than what can be
found in any single judge or panel of judges.” Precedent 9.

															Doubtless, past judicial decisions may, as they
always have, command “greater or less authority as precedents,
according to circumstances.” Lincoln Speech 401. But, like English
judges before us, we have long turned to familiar considerations to
guide our assessment of the weight due a past decision. So, for
example, as this Court has put it, the weight due a precedent may
depend on the quality of its reasoning, its consistency with
related decisions, its workability, and reliance interests that
have formed around it. See Ramos, 590 U. S., at 106.
The first factor recognizes that the primary power of any precedent
lies in its power to persuade—and poorly reasoned decisions may not
provide reliable evidence of the law’s meaning. The second factor
reflects the fact that a precedent is more likely to be correct and
worthy of respect when it reflects the time-tested wisdom of
generations than when it sits “unmoored” from surrounding law.
Ibid. The remaining factors, like workability and reliance,
do not often supply reason enough on their own to abide a flawed
decision, for almost any past decision is likely to benefit some
group eager to keep things as they are and content with how things
work. See, e.g., id., at 108. But these factors can
sometimes serve functions similar to the others, by pointing to
clues that may suggest a past decision is right in ways not
immediately obvious to the individual judge.

															When asking whether to follow or depart from a
precedent, some judges deploy adverbs. They speak of whether or not
a precedent qualifies as “demonstrably erroneous,” Gamble v.
United States, 587 U.S. 678, 711 (2019) (Thomas, J.,
concurring), or “egregiously wrong,” Ramos, 590 U. S.,
at 121 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part). But the emphasis the
adverb imparts is not meant for dramatic effect. It seeks to serve
instead as a reminder of a more substantive lesson. The lesson
that, in assessing the weight due a past decision, a judge is not
to be guided by his own impression alone, but must self-consciously
test his views against those who have come before, open to the
possibility that a precedent might be correct in ways not initially
apparent to him.

															Third, it would be a mistake to read
judicial opinions like statutes. Adopted through a robust and
democratic process, statutes often apply in all their particulars
to all persons. By contrast, when judges reach a decision in our
adversarial system, they render a judgment based only on the
factual record and legal arguments the parties at hand have chosen
to develop. A later court assessing a past decision must therefore
appreciate the possibility that different facts and different legal
arguments may dictate a different outcome. They must appreciate,
too, that, like anyone else, judges are “innately digressive,” and
their opinions may sometimes offer stray asides about a wider topic
that may sound nearly like legislative commands. Duxbury 4. Often,
enterprising counsel seek to exploit such statements to maximum
effect. See id., at 25. But while these digressions may
sometimes contain valuable counsel, they remain “vapours and fumes
of law,” Bacon 478, and cannot “control the judgment in a
subsequent suit,” Cohens, 6 Wheat., at 399.

															These principles, too, have long guided this
Court and others. As Judge Easterbrook has put it, an “opinion is
not a comprehensive code; it is just an explanation for the Court’s
disposition. Judicial opinions must not be confused with statutes,
and general expressions must be read in light of the subject under
consideration.” United States v. Skoien, 614 F.3d
638, 640 (CA7 2010) (en banc); see also Reiter v.
Sonotone Corp., 442 U.S.
330, 341 (1979) (stressing that an opinion is not “a statute,”
and its language should not “be parsed” as if it were);
Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U.S.
353, 372 (2001) (same). If stare decisis counsels
respect for the thinking of those who have come before, it also
counsels against doing an “injustice to [their] memory” by
overreliance on their every word. Steel, 1 Bl. H., at 53,
126 Eng. Rep., at 33. As judges, “[w]e neither expect nor hope that
our successors will comb” through our opinions, searching for
delphic answers to matters we never fully explored. Brown v.
Davenport, 596 U.S. 118, 141 (2022). To proceed otherwise
risks “turn[ing] stare decisis from a tool of judicial
humility into one of judicial hubris.” Ibid.

															II

															Turning now directly to the question what
stare decisis effect Chevron deference warrants, each
of these lessons seem to me to weigh firmly in favor of the course
the Court charts today: Lesson 1, because Chevron deference
contravenes the law Congress prescribed in the Administrative
Procedure Act. Lesson 2, because Chevron deference runs
against mainstream currents in our law regarding the separation of
powers, due process, and centuries-old interpretive rules that
fortify those constitutional commitments. And Lesson 3, because to
hold otherwise would effectively require us to endow stray
statements in Chevron with the authority of statutory
language, all while ignoring more considered language in that same
decision and the teachings of experience.

															A

															Start with Lesson 1. The Administrative
Procedure Act of 1946 (APA) directs a “reviewing court” to “decide
all relevant questions of law” and “interpret” relevant
“constitutional and statutory provisions.”
5 U. S. C. §706. When applying Chevron
deference, reviewing courts do not interpret all relevant statutory
provisions and decide all relevant questions of law. Instead,
judges abdicate a large measure of that responsibility in favor of
agency officials. Their interpretations of “ambiguous” laws control
even when those interpretations are at odds with the fairest
reading of the law an independent “reviewing court” can muster.
Agency officials, too, may change their minds about the law’s
meaning at any time, even when Congress has not amended the
relevant statutory language in any way. National Cable &
Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services,
545 U.S.
967, 982–983 (2005). And those officials may even disagree with
and effectively overrule not only their own past interpretations of
a law but a court’s past interpretation as well. Ibid. None
of that is consistent with the APA’s clear mandate.

															The hard fact is Chevron “did not even
bother to cite” the APA, let alone seek to apply its terms.
United States v. Mead Corp., 533
U.S. 218, 241 (2001) (Scalia, J., dissenting). Instead, as even
its most ardent defenders have conceded, Chevron deference
rests upon a “fictionalized statement of legislative
desire,” namely, a judicial supposition that Congress implicitly
wishes judges to defer to executive agencies’ interpretations of
the law even when it has said nothing of the kind. D. Barron &
E. Kagan, Chevron’s Nondelegation Doctrine, 2001 S. Ct. Rev.
201, 212 (Kagan) (emphasis added). As proponents see it, that
fiction represents a “policy judgmen[t] about what . . .
make[s] for good government.” Ibid.[2] But in our democracy unelected judges possess no
authority to elevate their own fictions over the laws adopted by
the Nation’s elected representatives. Some might think the legal
directive Congress provided in the APA unwise; some might think a
different arrangement preferable. See, e.g., post, at
9–11 (Kagan, J., dissenting). But it is Congress’s view of “good
government,” not ours, that controls.

															Much more could be said about Chevron’s
inconsistency with the APA. But I have said it in the past. See
Buffington v. McDonough, 598 U. S. ___, ___–___
(2022) (opinion dissenting from denial of certiorari) (slip op., at
5–6); Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, 834 F.3d 1142,
1151–1153 (CA10 2016) (concurring opinion). And the Court makes
many of the same points at length today. See ante, at 18–22.
For present purposes, the short of it is that continuing to abide
Chevron deference would require us to transgress the first
lesson of stare decisis—the humility required of judges to
recognize that our decisions must yield to the laws adopted by the
people’s elected representatives.[3]

															B

															Lesson 2 cannot rescue Chevron
deference. If stare decisis calls for judicial humility in
the face of the written law, it also cautions us to test our
present conclusions carefully against the work of our predecessors.
At the same time and as we have seen, this second form of humility
counsels us to remember that precedents that have won the
endorsement of judges across many generations, demonstrated
coherence with our broader law, and weathered the tests of time and
experience are entitled to greater consideration than those that
have not. See Part I, supra. Viewed by each of these lights,
the case for Chevron deference only grows weaker still.

															1

															Start with a look to how our predecessors
traditionally understood the judicial role in disputes over a law’s
meaning. From the Nation’s founding, they considered “[t]he
interpretation of the laws” in cases and controversies “the proper
and peculiar province of the courts.” The Federalist No. 78,
p. 467 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton). Perhaps the
Court’s most famous early decision reflected exactly that view.
There, Chief Justice Marshall declared it “emphatically the
province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law
is.” Marbury, 1 Cranch, at 177. For judges “have neither
FORCE nor WILL but merely judgment”—and an obligation to exercise
that judgment independently. The Federalist No. 78, at 465. No
matter how “disagreeable that duty may be,” this Court has said, a
judge “is not at liberty to surrender, or to waive it.” United
States v. Dickson, 15 Pet. 141, 162 (1841) (Story, J.).
This duty of independent judgment is perhaps “the defining
characteristi[c] of Article III judges.” Stern v.
Marshall, 564 U.S.
462, 483 (2011).

															To be sure, this Court has also long extended
“great respect” to the “contemporaneous” and consistent views of
the coordinate branches about the meaning of a statute’s terms.
Edwards’ Lessee v. Darby, 12 Wheat. 206, 210 (1827);
see also McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 401
(1819); Stuart v. Laird, 1 Cranch 299, 309
(1803).[4] But traditionally,
that did not mean a court had to “defer” to any “reasonable”
construction of an “ambiguous” law that an executive agency might
offer. It did not mean that the government could propound a
“reasonable” view of the law’s meaning one day, a different one the
next, and bind the judiciary always to its latest word. Nor did it
mean the executive could displace a pre-existing judicial
construction of a statute’s terms, replace it with its own, and
effectively overrule a judicial precedent in the process. Put
simply, this Court was “not bound” by any and all reasonable
“administrative construction[s]” of ambiguous statutes when
resolving cases and controversies. Burnet v. Chicago
Portrait Co., 285 U.S.
1, 16 (1932). While the executive’s consistent and
contemporaneous views warranted respect, they “by no means
control[led] the action or the opinion of this court in expounding
the law with reference to the rights of parties litigant before
them.” Irvine v. Marshall, 20 How. 558, 567 (1858);
see also A. Bamzai, The Origins of Judicial Deference to Executive
Interpretation, 126 Yale L. J. 908, 987 (2017).

															Sensing how jarringly inconsistent
Chevron is with this Court’s many longstanding precedents
discussing the nature of the judicial role in disputes over the
law’s meaning, the government and dissent struggle for a response.
The best they can muster is a handful of cases from the early 1940s
in which, they say, this Court first “put [deference] principles
into action.” Post, at 21 (Kagan, J., dissenting). And,
admittedly, for a period this Court toyed with a form of deference
akin to Chevron, at least for so-called mixed questions of
law and fact. See, e.g., Gray v. Powell,
314 U.S.
402, 411–412 (1941); NLRB v. Hearst Publications,
Inc., 322 U.S.
111, 131 (1944). But, as the Court details, even that limited
experiment did not last. See ante, at 10–12. Justice
Roberts, in his Gray dissent, decried these decisions for
“abdicat[ing our] function as a court of review” and “complete[ly]
revers[ing] . . . the normal and usual method of
construing a statute.” 314 U. S., at 420–421. And just a few
years later, in Skidmore v. Swift & Co.,
323 U.S.
134 (1944), the Court returned to its time-worn path.

															Echoing themes that had run throughout our law
from its start, Justice Robert H. Jackson wrote for the Court in
Skidmore. There, he said, courts may extend respectful
consideration to another branch’s interpretation of the law, but
the weight due those interpretations must always “depend upon
the[ir] thoroughness . . . , the validity of [their]
reasoning, [their] consistency with earlier and later
pronouncements, and all those factors which give [them] power to
persuade.” Id., at 140. In another case the same year, and
again writing for the Court, Justice Jackson expressly rejected a
call for a judge-made doctrine of deference much like
Chevron, offering that, “[i]f Congress had deemed it
necessary or even appropriate” for courts to “defe[r] to
administrative construction[,] . . . it would not have
been at a loss for words to say so.” Davies Warehouse Co. v.
Bowles, 321 U.S.
144, 156 (1944).

															To the extent proper respect for precedent
demands, as it always has, special respect for longstanding and
mainstream decisions, Chevron scores badly. It represented
not a continuation of a long line of decisions but a break from
them. Worse, it did not merely depart from our precedents. More
nearly, Chevron defied them.

															2

															Consider next how uneasily Chevron
deference sits alongside so many other settled aspects of our law.
Having witnessed first-hand King George’s efforts to gain influence
and control over colonial judges, see Declaration of Independence ¶
11, the framers made a considered judgment to build judicial
independence into the Constitution’s design. They vested the
judicial power in decisionmakers with life tenure. Art. III,
§1. They placed the judicial salary beyond political control during
a judge’s tenure. Ibid. And they rejected any proposal that
would subject judicial decisions to review by political actors. The
Federalist No. 81, at 482; United States v. Hansen,
599 U.S. 762, 786–791 (2023) (Thomas, J., concurring). All of this
served to ensure the same thing: “A fair trial in a fair tribunal.”
In re Murchison, 349 U.S.
133, 136 (1955). One in which impartial judges, not those
currently wielding power in the political branches, would “say what
the law is” in cases coming to court. Marbury, 1 Cranch, at
177.

															Chevron deference undermines all that. It
precludes courts from exercising the judicial power vested in them
by Article III to say what the law is. It forces judges to abandon
the best reading of the law in favor of views of those presently
holding the reins of the Executive Branch. It requires judges to
change, and change again, their interpretations of the law as and
when the government demands. And that transfer of power has exactly
the sort of consequences one might expect. Rather than insulate
adjudication from power and politics to ensure a fair hearing
“without respect to persons” as the federal judicial oath demands,
28 U. S. C. §453, Chevron deference requires
courts to “place a finger on the scales of justice in favor of the
most powerful of litigants, the federal government.”
Buffington, 598 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9). Along
the way, Chevron deference guarantees “systematic bias” in
favor of whichever political party currently holds the levers of
executive power. P. Hamburger, Chevron Bias, 84 Geo. Wash.
L. Rev. 1187, 1212 (2016).

															Chevron deference undermines other
aspects of our settled law, too. In this country, we often boast
that the Constitution’s promise of due process of law, see Amdts.
5, 14, means that “ ‘no man can be a judge in his own
case.’ ” Williams v. Pennsylvania, 579 U.S. 1,
8–9 (2016); Calder v. Bull, 3 Dall. 386, 388 (1798)
(opinion of Chase, J.). That principle, of course, has even deeper
roots, tracing far back into the common law where it was known by
the Latin maxim nemo iudex in causa sua. See 1 E. Coke,
Institutes of the Laws of England §212, *141a. Yet, under the
Chevron regime, all that means little, for executive
agencies may effectively judge the scope of their own lawful
powers. See, e.g., Arlington v. FCC, 569 U.S.
290, 296–297 (2013).

															Traditionally, as well, courts have sought to
construe statutes as a reasonable reader would “when the law was
made.” Blackstone 59; see United States v. Fisher, 2
Cranch 358, 386 (1805). Today, some call this “textualism.” But
really it’s a very old idea, one that constrains judges to a
lawfinding rather than lawmaking role by focusing their work on the
statutory text, its linguistic context, and various canons of
construction. In that way, textualism serves as an essential
guardian of the due process promise of fair notice. If a judge
could discard an old meaning and assign a new one to a law’s terms,
all without any legislative revision, how could people ever be sure
of the rules that bind them? New Prime Inc. v.
Oliveira, 586 U.S. 105, 113 (2019). Were the rules
otherwise, Blackstone warned, the people would be rendered “slaves
to their magistrates.” 4 Blackstone 371.

															Yet, replace “magistrates” with “bureaucrats,”
and Blackstone’s fear becomes reality when courts employ
Chevron deference. Whenever we confront an ambiguity in the
law, judges do not seek to resolve it impartially according to the
best evidence of the law’s original meaning. Instead, we resort to
a far cruder heuristic: “The reasonable bureaucrat always wins.”
And because the reasonable bureaucrat may change his mind
year-to-year and election-to-election, the people can never know
with certainty what new “interpretations” might be used against
them. This “fluid” approach to statutory interpretation is “as much
a trap for the innocent as the ancient laws of Caligula,” which
were posted so high up on the walls and in print so small that
ordinary people could never be sure what they required. United
States v. Cardiff, 344 U.S.
174, 176 (1952).

															The ancient rule of lenity is still another of
Chevron’s victims. Since the founding, American courts have
construed ambiguities in penal laws against the government and with
lenity toward affected persons. Wooden v. United
States, 595 U.S. 360, 388–390 (2022) (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring in judgment). That principle upholds due process by
safeguarding individual liberty in the face of ambiguous laws.
Ibid. And it fortifies the separation of powers by keeping
the power of punishment firmly “ ‘in the legislative, not in
the judicial department.’ ” Id., at 391 (quoting
United States v. Wiltberger, 5 Wheat. 76, 95 (1820)).
But power begets power. And pressing Chevron deference as
far as it can go, the government has sometimes managed to leverage
“ambiguities” in the written law to penalize conduct Congress never
clearly proscribed. Compare Guedes v. ATF, 920 F.3d
1, 27–28, 31 (CADC 2019), with Garland v. Cargill,
602 U.S. 604 (2024).

															In all these ways, Chevron’s fiction has
led us to a strange place. One where authorities long thought
reserved for Article III are transferred to Article II, where the
scales of justice are tilted systematically in favor of the most
powerful, where legal demands can change with every election even
though the laws do not, and where the people are left to guess
about their legal rights and responsibilities. So much tension with
so many foundational features of our legal order is surely one more
sign that we have “taken a wrong turn along the way.” Kisor
v. Wilkie, 588 U.S. 558, 607 (2019) (Gorsuch, J., concurring
in judgment).[5]

															3

															Finally, consider workability and reliance.
If, as I have sought to suggest, these factors may sometimes serve
as useful proxies for the question whether a precedent comports
with the historic tide of judicial practice or represents an
aberrational mistake, see Part I–C, supra, they certainly do
here.

															Take Chevron’s “workability.” Throughout
its short life, this Court has been forced to supplement and revise
Chevron so many times that no one can agree on how many
“steps” it requires, nor even what each of those “steps” entails.
Some suggest that the analysis begins with “step zero” (perhaps
itself a tell), an innovation that traces to United States
v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S.
218. Mead held that, before even considering whether
Chevron applies, a court must determine whether Congress
meant to delegate to the agency authority to interpret the law in a
given field. 533 U. S., at 226–227. But that exercise faces an
immediate challenge: Because Chevron depends on a judicially
implied, rather than a legislatively expressed, delegation of
interpretive authority to an executive agency, Part II–A,
supra, when should the fiction apply and when not?
Mead fashioned a multifactor test for judges to use. 533
U. S., at 229–231. But that test has proved as indeterminate
in application as it was contrived in origin. Perhaps for these
reasons, perhaps for others, this Court has sometimes applied
Mead and often ignored it. See Brand X, 545
U. S., at 1014, n. 8 (Scalia, J., dissenting).

															Things do not improve as we move up the
Chevron ladder. At “step one,” a judge must defer to an
executive official’s interpretation when the statute at hand is
“ambiguous.” But even today, Chevron’s principal
beneficiary—the federal government—still cannot say when a statute
is sufficiently ambiguous to trigger deference. See, e.g.,
Tr. of Oral Arg. in American Hospital Assn. v.
Becerra, O. T. 2021, No. 20–1114, pp. 71–72.
Perhaps thanks to this particular confusion, the search for
ambiguity has devolved into a sort of Snark hunt: Some judges claim
to spot it almost everywhere, while other equally fine judges claim
never to have seen it. Compare L. Silberman, Chevron—The
Intersection of Law & Policy, 58 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 821,
826 (1990), with R. Kethledge, Ambiguities and Agency Cases:
Reflections After (Almost) Ten Years on the Bench, 70 Vand.
L. Rev. En Banc 315, 323 (2017).

															Nor do courts agree when it comes to “step two.”
There, a judge must assess whether an executive agency’s
interpretation of an ambiguous statute is “reasonable.” But what
does that inquiry demand? Some courts engage in a comparatively
searching review; others almost reflexively defer to an agency’s
views. Here again, courts have pursued “wildly different”
approaches and reached wildly different conclusions in similar
cases. See B. Kavanaugh, Fixing Statutory Interpretation, 129 Harv.
L. Rev. 2118, 2152 (2016) (Kavanaugh).

															Today’s cases exemplify some of these problems.
We have before us two circuit decisions, three opinions, and at
least as many interpretive options on the Chevron menu. On
the one hand, we have the D. C. Circuit majority, which deemed the
Magnuson-Stevens Act “ambiguous” and upheld the agency’s regulation
as “ ‘permissible.’ ” 45 F. 4th 359, 365 (2022). On
the other hand, we have the D. C. Circuit dissent, which argues the
statute is “unambiguou[s]” and that it plainly forecloses the
agency’s new rule. Id., at 372 (opinion of Walker, J.). And
on yet a third hand, we have the First Circuit, which claimed to
have identified “clear textual support” for the regulation, yet
refused to say whether it would “classify [its] conclusion as a
product of Chevron step one or step two.” 62 F. 4th
621, 631, 634 (2023). As these cases illustrate, Chevron has
turned statutory interpretation into a game of bingo under
blindfold, with parties guessing at how many boxes there are and
which one their case might ultimately fall in.

															Turn now from workability to reliance. Far from
engendering reliance interests, the whole point of Chevron
deference is to upset them. Under Chevron, executive
officials can replace one “reasonable” interpretation with another
at any time, all without any change in the law itself. The result:
Affected individuals “can never be sure of their legal rights and
duties.” Buffington, 598 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
12).

															How bad is the problem? Take just one example.
Brand X concerned a law regulating broadband internet
services. There, the Court upheld an agency rule adopted by the
administration of President George W. Bush because it was premised
on a “reasonable” interpretation of the statute. Later, President
Barack Obama’s administration rescinded the rule and replaced it
with another. Later still, during President Donald J. Trump’s
administration, officials replaced that rule with a different one,
all before President Joseph R. Biden, Jr.’s administration declared
its intention to reverse course for yet a fourth time. See
Safeguarding and Securing the Open Internet, 88 Fed. Reg. 76048
(2023); Brand X, 545 U. S., at 981–982. Each time, the
government claimed its new rule was just as “reasonable” as the
last. Rather than promoting reliance by fixing the meaning of the
law, Chevron deference engenders constant uncertainty and
convulsive change even when the statute at issue itself remains
unchanged.

															Nor are these antireliance harms distributed
equally. Sophisticated entities and their lawyers may be able to
keep pace with rule changes affecting their rights and
responsibilities. They may be able to lobby for new
“ ‘reasonable’ ” agency interpretations and even capture
the agencies that issue them. Buffington, 598 U. S., at
___, ___ (slip op., at 8, 13). But ordinary people can do none of
those things. They are the ones who suffer the worst kind of
regulatory whiplash Chevron invites.

															Consider a couple of examples. Thomas
Buffington, a veteran of the U. S. Air Force, was injured in
the line of duty. For a time after he left the Air Force, the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) paid disability benefits due
him by law. But later the government called on Mr. Buffington to
reenter active service. During that period, everyone agreed, the VA
could (as it did) suspend his disability payments. After he left
active service for a second time, however, the VA turned his
patriotism against him. By law, Congress permitted the VA to
suspend disability pay only “for any period for which [a
servicemember] receives active service pay.” 38 U. S. C.
§5304(c). But the VA had adopted a self-serving regulation
requiring veterans to file a form asking for the resumption of
their disability pay after a second (or subsequent) stint in active
service. 38 CFR §3.654(b)(2) (2021). Unaware of the regulation, Mr.
Buffington failed to reapply immediately. When he finally figured
out what had happened and reapplied, the VA agreed to resume
payments going forward but refused to give Mr. Buffington all of
the past disability payments it had withheld. Buffington,
598 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 1–4).

															Mr. Buffington challenged the agency’s action as
inconsistent with Congress’s direction that the VA may suspend
disability payments only for those periods when a veteran returns
to active service. But armed with Chevron, the agency
defeated Mr. Buffington’s claim. Maybe the self-serving regulation
the VA cited as justification for its action was not premised on
the best reading of the law, courts said, but it represented a
“ ‘permissible’ ” one. 598 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 7). In that way, the Executive Branch was able to evade
Congress’s promises to someone who took the field repeatedly in the
Nation’s defense.

															In another case, one which I heard as a court of
appeals judge, De Niz Robles v. Lynch, 803 F.3d 1165
(CA10 2015), the Board of Immigration Appeals invoked
Chevron to overrule a judicial precedent on which many
immigrants had relied, see In re Briones, 24 I. &
N. Dec. 355, 370 (BIA 2007) (purporting to overrule
Padilla–Caldera v. Gonzales, 
426 F.3d 1294 (CA10 2005)). The agency then sought to apply its
new interpretation retroactively to punish those
immigrants—including Alfonzo De Niz Robles, who had relied on that
judicial precedent as authority to remain in this country with his
U. S. wife and four children. See 803 F. 3d, at
1168–1169. Our court ruled that this retrospective application of
the BIA’s new interpretation of the law violated Mr. De Niz
Robles’s due process rights. Id., at 1172. But as a lower
court, we could treat only the symptom, not the disease. So
Chevron permitted the agency going forward to overrule a
judicial decision about the best reading of the law with its own
different “reasonable” one and in that way deny relief to countless
future immigrants.

															Those are just two stories among so many that
federal judges could tell (and have told) about what Chevron
deference has meant for ordinary people interacting with the
federal government. See, e.g., Lambert v.
Saul, 980 F.3d 1266, 1268–1276 (CA9 2020); Valent v.
Commissioner of Social Security, 918 F.3d 516,
525–527 (CA6 2019) (Kethledge, J., dissenting); Gonzalez v.
United States Atty. Gen., 820 F.3d 399, 402–405 (CA11 2016)
(per curiam).

															What does the federal government have to say
about this? It acknowledges that Chevron sits as a heavy
weight on the scale in favor of the government, “oppositional” to
many “categories of individuals.” Tr. of Oral Arg. in No. 22–1219,
p. 133 (Relentless Tr.). But, according to the government,
Chevron deference is too important an innovation to undo. In
its brief reign, the government says, it has become a
“fundamenta[l] . . . ground rul[e] for how all three
branches of the government are operating together.” Relentless Tr.
102. But, in truth, the Constitution, the APA, and our longstanding
precedents set those ground rules some time ago. And under them,
agencies cannot invoke a judge-made fiction to unsettle our
Nation’s promise to individuals that they are entitled to make
their arguments about the law’s demands on them in a fair hearing,
one in which they stand on equal footing with the government before
an independent judge.

															C

															How could a Court, guided for 200 years by
Chief Justice Marshall’s example, come to embrace a
counter-Marbury revolution, one at war with the APA, time
honored precedents, and so much surrounding law? To answer these
questions, turn to Lesson 3 and witness the temptation to endow a
stray passage in a judicial decision with extraordinary authority.
Call it “power quoting.”

															Chevron was an unlikely place for a
revolution to begin. The case concerned the Clean Air Act’s
requirement that States regulate “stationary sources” of air
pollution in their borders. See
42 U. S. C. §7401 et seq. At the
time, it was an open question whether entire industrial plants or
their constituent polluting parts counted as “stationary sources.”
The Environmental Protection Agency had defined entire plants as
sources, an approach that allowed companies to replace individual
plant parts without automatically triggering the permitting
requirements that apply to new sources. Chevron,
467 U. S., at 840.

															This Court upheld the EPA’s definition as
consistent with the governing statute. Id., at 866. The
decision, issued by a bare quorum of the Court, without concurrence
or dissent, purported to apply “well-settled principles.”
Id., at 845. “If a court, employing traditional tools of
statutory construction, ascertains that Congress had an intention
on the precise question at issue,” Chevron provided, then
“that intention is the law and must be given effect.” Id.,
at 843, n. 9. Many of the cases Chevron cited to
support its judgment stood for the traditional proposition that
courts afford respectful consideration, not deference, to executive
interpretations of the law. See, e.g., Burnet, 285
U. S., at 16; United States v. Moore, 95 U.S.
760, 763 (1878). And the decision’s sole citation to legal
scholarship was to Roscoe Pound, who long championed de novo
judicial review. 467 U. S., at 843, n. 10; see R. Pound,
The Place of the Judiciary in a Democratic Polity, 27
A. B. A. J. 133, 136–137 (1941).

															At the same time, of course, the opinion
contained bits and pieces that spoke differently. The decision also
said that, “if [a] statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to
[a] specific issue, the question for the court is whether the
agency’s answer is based on a permissible construction of the
statute.” 467 U. S., at 843. But it seems the government
didn’t advance this formulation in its brief, so there was no
adversarial engagement on it. T. Merrill, The Story of
Chevron: The Making of an Accidental Landmark, 66 Admin.
L. Rev. 253, 268 (2014) (Merrill). As we have seen, too, the
Court did not pause to consider (or even mention) the APA. See Part
II–A, supra. It did not discuss contrary precedents issued
by the Court since the founding, let alone purport to overrule any
of them. See Part II–B–1, supra. Nor did the Court seek to
address how its novel rule of deference might be squared with so
much surrounding law. See Part II–B–2, supra. As even its
defenders have acknowledged, “Chevron barely bothered to
justify its rule of deference, and the few brief passages on this
matter pointed in disparate directions.” Kagan 212–213. “[T]he
quality of the reasoning,” they acknowledge, “was not high,” C.
Sunstein, Chevron as Law, 107 Geo. L. J. 1613, 1669
(2019).

															If Chevron meant to usher in a revolution
in how judges interpret laws, no one appears to have realized it at
the time. Chevron’s author, Justice Stevens, characterized
the decision as a “simpl[e] . . . restatement of existing
law, nothing more or less.” Merrill 255, 275. In the “19 argued
cases” in the following Term “that presented some kind of question
about whether the Court should defer to an agency interpretation of
statutory law,” this Court cited Chevron just once. Merrill
276. By some accounts, the decision seemed “destined to obscurity.”
Ibid.

															It was only three years later when Justice
Scalia wrote a concurrence that a revolution began to take shape.
Buffington, 598 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8). There,
he argued for a new rule requiring courts to defer to executive
agency interpretations of the law whenever a “ ‘statute is
silent or ambiguous.’ ” NLRB v. Food &
Commercial Workers, 484 U.S.
112, 133–134 (1987) (opinion of Scalia, J.). Eventually, a
majority of the Court followed his lead. Buffington, 598
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8). But from the start, Justice
Scalia made no secret about the scope of his ambitions. See
Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989
Duke L. J. 511, 521 (1989) (Scalia). The rule he advocated for
represented such a sharp break from prior practice, he explained,
that many judges of his day didn’t yet “understand” the “old
criteria” were “no longer relevant.” Ibid. Still, he said,
overthrowing the past was worth it because a new deferential rule
would be “easier to follow.” Ibid.

															Events proved otherwise. As the years wore on
and the Court’s new and aggressive reading of Chevron
gradually exposed itself as unworkable, unfair, and at odds with
our separation of powers, Justice Scalia could have doubled down on
the project. But he didn’t. He appreciated that stare
decisis is not a rule of “if I thought it yesterday, I must
think it tomorrow.” And rather than cling to the pride of personal
precedent, the Justice began to express doubts over the very
project that he had worked to build. See Perez v.
Mortgage Bankers Assn., 575 U.S.
92, 109–110 (2015) (opinion concurring in judgment); cf.
Decker v. Northwest Environmental Defense Center,
568 U.S.
597, 617–618, 621 (2013) (opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part). If Chevron’s ascent is a testament to
the Justice’s ingenuity, its demise is an even greater tribute to
his humility.[6]

															Justice Scalia was not alone in his
reconsideration. After years spent laboring under Chevron,
trying to make sense of it and make it work, Member after Member of
this Court came to question the project. See, e.g.,
Pereira v. Sessions, 585 U.S. 198, 219–221 (2018)
(Kennedy, J., concurring); Michigan v. EPA, 576 U.S.
743, 760–764 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring); Kisor, 588
U. S., at 591 (Roberts, C. J., concurring in part);
Gutierrez-Brizuela, 834 F. 3d, at 1153;
Buffington, 598 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 14–15);
Kavanaugh 2150–2154. Ultimately, the Court gave up. Despite
repeated invitations, it has not applied Chevron deference
since 2016. Relentless Tr. 81; App. to Brief for Respondents in No.
22–1219, p. 68a. So an experiment that began only in the
mid-1980s effectively ended eight years ago. Along the way, an
unusually large number of federal appellate judges voiced their own
thoughtful and extensive criticisms of Chevron.
Buffington, 598 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 14–15)
(collecting examples). A number of state courts did, too, refusing
to import Chevron deference into their own administrative
law jurisprudence. See 598 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
15).

															Even if all that and everything else laid out
above is true, the government suggests we should retain
Chevron deference because judges simply cannot live without
it; some statutes are just too “technical” for courts to interpret
“intelligently.” Post, at 9, 32 (dissenting opinion). But
that objection is no answer to Chevron’s inconsistency with
Congress’s directions in the APA, so much surrounding law, or the
challenges its multistep regime have posed in practice. Nor does
history counsel such defeatism. Surely, it would be a mistake to
suggest our predecessors before Chevron’s rise in the
mid-1980s were unable to make their way intelligently through
technical statutory disputes. Following their lead, over the past
eight years this Court has managed to resolve even highly complex
cases without Chevron deference, and done so even when the
government sought deference. Nor, as far as I am aware, did any
Member of the Court suggest Chevron deference was necessary
to an intelligent resolution of any of those matters.[7] If anything, by affording Chevron
deference a period of repose before addressing whether it should be
retained, the Court has enabled its Members to test the propriety
of that precedent and reflect more deeply on how well it fits into
the broader architecture of our law. Others may see things
differently, see post, at 26–27 (dissenting opinion), but
the caution the Court has exhibited before overruling
Chevron may illustrate one of the reasons why the current
Court has been slower to overrule precedents than some of its
predecessors, see Part I–C, supra.

															None of this, of course, discharges any Member
of this Court from the task of deciding for himself or herself
today whether Chevron deference itself warrants deference.
But when so many past and current judicial colleagues in this Court
and across the country tell us our doctrine is misguided, and when
we ourselves managed without Chevron for centuries and
manage to do so today, the humility at the core of stare
decisis compels us to pause and reflect carefully on the wisdom
embodied in that experience. And, in the end, to my mind the
lessons of experience counsel wisely against continued reliance on
Chevron’s stray and unconsidered digression. This Court’s
opinions fill over 500 volumes, and perhaps “some printed judicial
word may be found to support almost any plausible proposition.” R.
Jackson, Decisional Law and Stare Decisis, 30 A. B. A. J.
334 (1944). It is not for us to pick and choose passages we happen
to like and demand total obedience to them in perpetuity. That
would turn stare decisis from a doctrine of humility into a
tool for judicial opportunism. Brown, 596 U. S., at
141.

															III

															Proper respect for precedent helps “keep the
scale of justice even and steady,” by reinforcing decisional rules
consistent with the law upon which all can rely. 1 Blackstone 69.
But that respect does not require, nor does it readily tolerate, a
steadfast refusal to correct mistakes. As early as 1810, this Court
had already overruled one of its cases. See Hudson v.
Guestier, 6 Cranch 281, 284 (overruling Rose v.
Himely, 4 Cranch 241 (1808)). In recent years, the Court may
have overruled precedents less frequently than it did during the
Warren and Burger Courts. See Part I–C, supra. But the job
of reconsidering past decisions remains one every Member of this
Court faces from time to time.[8]

															Justice William O. Douglas served longer on this
Court than any other person in the Nation’s history. During his
tenure, he observed how a new colleague might be inclined initially
to “revere” every word written in an opinion issued before he
arrived. W. Douglas, Stare Decisis, 49 Colum. L. Rev. 735, 736
(1949). But, over time, Justice Douglas reflected, his new
colleague would “remembe[r] . . . that it is the
Constitution which he swore to support and defend, not the gloss
which his predecessors may have put on it.” Ibid. And “[s]o
he [would] com[e] to formulate his own views, rejecting some
earlier ones as false and embracing others.” Ibid. This
process of reexamination, Justice Douglas explained, is a
“necessary consequence of our system” in which each judge takes an
oath—both “personal” and binding—to discern the law’s meaning for
himself and apply it faithfully in the cases that come before him.
Id., at 736–737.

															Justice Douglas saw, too, how appeals to
precedent could be overstated and sometimes even overwrought.
Judges, he reflected, would sometimes first issue “new and
startling decision[s],” and then later spin around and “acquire an
acute conservatism” in their aggressive defense of “their new
status quo.” Id., at 737. In that way, even the most
novel and unlikely decisions became “coveted anchorage[s],”
defended heatedly, if ironically, under the banner of “stare
decisis.” Ibid.; see also Edwards v.
Vannoy, 593 U.S. 255, 294, n. 7 (2021) (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring).

															That is Chevron’s story: A revolution
masquerading as the status quo. And the defense of it follows the
same course Justice Douglas described. Though our dissenting
colleagues have not hesitated to question other precedents in the
past, they today manifest what Justice Douglas called an “acute
conservatism” for Chevron’s “startling” development,
insisting that if this “coveted anchorage” is abandoned the heavens
will fall. But the Nation managed to live with busy executive
agencies of all sorts long before the Chevron revolution
began to take shape in the mid-1980s. And all today’s decision
means is that, going forward, federal courts will do exactly as
this Court has since 2016, exactly as it did before the mid-1980s,
and exactly as it had done since the founding: resolve cases and
controversies without any systemic bias in the government’s
favor.

															Proper respect for precedent does not begin to
suggest otherwise. Instead, it counsels respect for the written
law, adherence to consistent teachings over aberrations, and
resistance to the temptation of treating our own stray remarks as
if they were statutes. And each of those lessons points toward the
same conclusion today: Chevron deference is inconsistent
with the directions Congress gave us in the APA. It represents a
grave anomaly when viewed against the sweep of historic judicial
practice. The decision undermines core rule-of-law values ranging
from the promise of fair notice to the promise of a fair hearing.
Even on its own terms, it has proved unworkable and operated to
undermine rather than advance reliance interests, often to the
detriment of ordinary Americans. And from the start, the whole
project has relied on the overaggressive use of snippets and stray
remarks from an opinion that carried mixed messages. Stare
decisis’s true lesson today is not that we are bound to respect
Chevron’s “startling development,” but bound to inter
it.

Notes
1
 For relevant databases of
decisions, see Congressional Research Service, Table of Supreme
Court Decisions Overruled by Subsequent Decisions, Constitution
Annotated,
https://constitution.congress.gov/resources/decisions-overruled/;
see also H. Spaeth et al., 2023 Supreme Court Database,
http://supremecourtdatabase.org.
2
 See also A. Scalia,
Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989
Duke L. J. 511, 516–517 (1989) (describing Chevron’s
theory that Congress “delegat[ed]” interpretive authority to
agencies as “fictional”); S. Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions
of Law and Policy, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 363, 370 (1986) (describing
the notion that there exists a “ ‘legislative intent to
delegate the law-interpreting function’ as a kind of legal
fiction”).
3
 The dissent suggests that
we need not take the APA’s directions quite so seriously because
the “finest administrative law scholars” from Harvard claim to see
in them some wiggle room. Post, at 18 (opinion of Kagan,
J.). But nothing in the APA commands deference to the views of
professors any more than it does the government. Nor is the
dissent’s list of Harvard’s finest administrative law scholars
entirely complete. See S. Breyer et al., Administrative Law and
Regulatory Policy 288 (7th ed. 2011) (acknowledging that
Chevron deference “seems in conflict with . . .
the apparently contrary language of 706”); Kagan 212 (likewise
acknowledging Chevron deference rests upon a “fictionalized
statement of legislative desire”).
4
 Accord, National Lead
Co. v. United States, 252 U.S.
140, 145–146 (1920) (affording “great weight” to a
“contemporaneous construction” by the executive that had “been long
continued”); Jacobs v. Prichard, 223 U.S.
200, 214 (1912) (“find[ing] no ambiguity in the act” but also
finding “strength” for the Court’s interpretation in the
executive’s “immediate and continued construction of the act”);
Schell’s Executors v. Fauché, 138
U.S. 562, 572 (1891) (treating as “controlling” a
“contemporaneous construction” of a law endorsed “not only [by] the
courts but [also by] the departments”).
5
 The dissent suggests that
Chevron deference bears at least something in common with
surrounding law because it resembles a presumption or traditional
canon of construction, and both “are common.” Post, at 8,
n. 1, 28–29 (opinion of Kagan, J.). But even that thin reed
wavers at a glance. Many of the presumptions and interpretive
canons the dissent cites—including lenity, contra
proferentem, and others besides—“ ‘embod[y]
. . . legal doctrine[s] centuries older than our
Republic.’ ” Opati v. Republic of Sudan, 590
U.S. 418, 425 (2020). Chevron deference can make no such
boast. Many of the presumptions and canons the dissent cites also
serve the Constitution, protecting the lines of authority it draws.
Take just two examples: The federalism canon tells courts to
presume federal statutes do not preempt state laws because of the
sovereignty States enjoy under the Constitution. Bond v.
United States, 572 U.S.
844, 858 (2014). The presumption against retroactivity serves
as guardian of the Constitution’s promise of due process and its
ban on ex post facto laws, Landgraf v. USI Film
Products, 511 U.S.
244, 265 (1994). Once more, however, Chevron deference
can make no similar claim. Rather than serve the Constitution’s
usual rule that litigants are entitled to have an independent judge
interpret disputed legal terms, Chevron deference works to
undermine that promise. As explored above, too, Chevron
deference sits in tension with many traditional legal presumptions
and interpretive principles, representing nearly the inverse
of the rules of lenity, nemo iudex, and contra
proferentem.
6
 It should be recalled
that, when Justice Scalia launched the Chevron revolution,
there were many judges who “abhor[red] . . . ‘plain
meaning’ ” and preferred instead to elevate “legislative
history” and their own curated accounts of a law’s “purpose[s]”
over enacted statutory text. Scalia 515, 521. Chevron, he
predicted, would provide a new guardrail against that practice.
Scalia 515, 521. As the Justice’s later writings show, he
had the right diagnosis, just the wrong cure. The answer for judges
eliding statutory terms is not deference to agencies that may seek
to do the same, but a demand that all return to a more faithful
adherence to the written law. That was, of course, another project
Justice Scalia championed. And as we like to say, “we’re all
textualists now.”
7
 See, e.g.,
Becerra v. Empire Health Foundation, for Valley Hospital
Medical Center, 597 U.S. 424, 434 (2022) (resolving intricate
Medicare dispute by reference solely to “text,” “context,” and
“structure”); see also Sackett v. EPA, 598 U.S. 651
(2023) (same in a complex Clean Water Act dispute); Johnson
v. Guzman Chavez, 594 U.S. 523 (2021) (same in technical
immigration case).
8
 Today’s dissenters are no
exceptions. They have voted to overrule precedents that they
consider “wrong,” Hurst v. Florida, 577 U.S.
92, 101 (2016) (opinion for the Court by Sotomayor, J., joined
by, inter alios, Kagan, J.); Obergefell v.
Hodges, 576 U.S.
644, 665, 675 (2015) (opinion for the Court, joined by,
inter alios, Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ.); that conflict with
the Constitution’s “original meaning,” Alleyne v. United
States, 570 U.S.
99, 118 (2013) (Sotomayor, J., joined by, inter alias,
Kagan, J., concurring); and that have proved “unworkable,”
Johnson v. United States, 576
U.S. 591, 605 (2015) (opinion for the Court, joined by,
inter alios, Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ.); see also
Erlinger v. United States, 602 U. S. ___,
___ (2024) (Jackson, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 1) (arguing
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S.
466 (2000), and the many cases applying it were all “wrongly
decided”).


