::decision_cite:: 22-585
::decision_name::  Culley v. Marshall
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–585

															_________________

															HALIMA TARIFFA CULLEY, et al.,
PETITIONERS v. STEVEN T. MARSHALL, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
ALABAMA, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eleventh circuit

															[May 9, 2024]

															

															Justice Gorsuch, with whom Justice Thomas
joins, concurring.

															I agree with the Court that, at a minimum, the
Due Process Clause requires a prompt hearing in civil forfeiture
cases. Ante, at 5. I agree that no legal authority presented
to us indicates a prompt hearing must necessarily take the form Ms.
Culley and Ms. Sutton suppose. Ante, at 6. I agree, too,
that Mathews v. Eldridge, 424
U.S. 319 (1976), does not teach otherwise. Ante, at 9.
Under its terms, judges balance “the private and governmental
interests at stake,” Mathews, 424 U. S., at 340, to
determine “what procedures the government must observe” when it
seeks to withhold “benefits” “such as welfare or Social Security,”
Nelson v. Colorado, 581 U.S. 128, 141 (2017) (Alito,
J., concurring in judgment). That test does not control—and we do
not afford any particular solicitude to “governmental interests”—in
cases like this one where the government seeks to deprive an
individual of her private property. But if all that leads me to
join today’s decision, I also agree with the dissent that this case
leaves many larger questions unresolved about whether, and to what
extent, contemporary civil forfeiture practices can be squared with
the Constitution’s promise of due process. I write separately to
highlight some of them.

															I

															The facts of this case are worth pausing over
because they are typical of many. Halima Culley, a Georgia
resident, bought a 2015 Nissan Altima for her son to use while he
was away studying at the University of South Alabama. App. 58,
¶¶22–24. The car belongs to her and she pays for its registration
and insurance. Ibid., ¶¶25–26. The plan was for her son to
bring the car home during the summer for the family to share.
Id., at 60, ¶37. But before that could happen, a police
officer in Alabama pulled her son over and arrested him for
possessing marijuana and drug paraphernalia. Id., at 59,
¶27. The officer also took the car. Ibid., ¶28. Eventually,
law enforcement officials learned that the Nissan belonged to Ms.
Culley, not her son. But instead of returning it, they initiated
civil forfeiture proceedings in the hope of keeping the vehicle
permanently. Ibid., ¶¶30–33. It took a lawsuit and a
20-month wait for the car to make its way back to her. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 3a.

															For Alabama, this was business as usual. Often,
the State’s law enforcement agencies may take and keep private
property without a warrant or any other form of prior process. Ala.
Code §20–2–93(d) (2023 Cum. Supp.). Instead, only after taking the
property must the agency file a civil forfeiture action in court.
Once there, the agency need present only a “prima facie” case that
the property in question represents proceeds “traceable” to a drug
crime or property used to “facilitate” one. §§20–2–93(b)(3),
(b)(5); Ex parte McConathy, 
911 So. 2d 677, 681 (Ala. 2005). If the agency proves just that
much, the burden sometimes shifts to the property’s owner to prove
she was an “innocent owner” who did not know about or consent to
the conduct that caused the property to be taken. §§20–2–93(w),
(a)(4). Should the agency prevail in the end, it may keep the
property for its own use or sell it and keep the money.
§20–2–93(s).

															Laws like Alabama’s exist in many States and at
the federal level. But as commonplace as these civil forfeiture
laws may be, most are pretty new. As part of the War on Drugs, in
the 1970s and 1980s Congress began enacting sweeping new civil
forfeiture statutes allowing the government to seize and keep the
proceeds of drug crimes and the personal property used to
facilitate them. See S. Cassella, Asset Forfeiture Law in the
United States §2–4, p. 48 (3d ed. 2022). Since then, the
federal government has extended similar civil forfeiture rules to
most federal offenses. Id., at 49. Today, it appears,
“[w]hite-collar and firearms crimes” now “accoun[t] for larger
shares of all [federal] forfeitures than drug crimes.” L. Knepper,
J. McDonald, K. Sanchez, & E. Pohl, Policing for Profit: The
Abuse of Civil Asset Forfeiture 26 (3d ed. 2020) (Knepper).
Following the federal government’s lead, many States have adopted
similar laws of their own. See id., at 170–185.

															These new laws have altered law enforcement
practices across the Nation in profound ways. My dissenting
colleagues catalogue a number of examples, see post, at 3–6
(opinion of Sotomayor, J.), but consider just a few here. To secure
a criminal penalty like a fine, disgorgement of illegal profits, or
restitution, the government must comply with strict procedural
rules and prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
In re Winship, 397 U.S.
358, 363 (1970). In civil forfeiture, however, the government
can simply take the property and later proceed to court to earn the
right to keep it under a far more forgiving burden of proof. See
Knepper 39. In part thanks to this asymmetry, civil forfeiture has
become a booming business. In 2018, federal forfeitures alone
brought in $2.5 billion. Id., at 15. Meanwhile, according to
some reports, these days “up to 80% of civil forfeitures are not
accompanied by a criminal conviction.” Brief for Buckeye Institute
as Amicus Curiae 14 (Buckeye Brief ).

															Law enforcement agencies have become
increasingly dependent on the money they raise from civil
forfeitures. The federal government shares a large portion of what
it receives with state and local law enforcement agencies that aid
its forfeiture efforts. Dept. of Justice & Dept. of Treasury,
Guide to Equitable Sharing for State, Local, and Tribal Law
Enforcement Agencies 3, 12 (Mar. 2024). At one time or another,
“[o]ver 90% of the agencies serving jurisdictions with populations”
above 250,000 have participated in this “equitable sharing” scheme.
E. Jensen & J. Gerber, The Civil Forfeiture of Assets and the
War on Drugs: Expanding Criminal Sanctions While Reducing Due
Process Protections, 42 Crime & Delinquency 421, 425 (1996).
And it seems that, when local law enforcement budgets tighten,
forfeiture activity often increases. B. Kelly, Fighting Crime or
Raising Revenue? Testing Opposing Views of Forfeiture 15
(2019).

															Not only do law enforcement agencies have strong
financial incentives to pursue forfeitures, those incentives also
appear to influence how they conduct them. Some agencies, for
example, reportedly place special emphasis on seizing low-value
items and relatively small amounts of cash, hopeful their actions
won’t be contested because the cost of litigating to retrieve the
property may cost more than the value of the property itself. See
Knepper 9. Other agencies seem to prioritize seizures they can
monetize rather than those they cannot, posing for example as drug
dealers rather than buyers so they can seize the buyer’s cash
rather than illicit drugs that hold no value for law enforcement.
See Buckeye Brief 7–8.

															Delay can work to these agencies’ advantage as
well. See Brief for Institute for Justice et al. as Amici
Curiae 16. Faced with the prospect of waiting months or years
to secure the return of a car or some other valuable piece of
property they need to work and live, even innocent owners sometimes
“settle” by “paying a fee to get it back.” Knepper 36. Contributing
to the inducement to settle is how little proof the agencies must
produce to win forfeiture, the cost of litigation, and the need to
appear in court—sometimes, as Ms. Culley learned, in a different
State. And if these tactics and burdens work against all affected
individuals, can it be any surprise “the poor and other groups
least able to defend their interests” often suffer most?
Leonard v. Texas, 580 U.S. 1178, 1180 (2017)
(statement of Thomas, J., respecting denial of certiorari); see
post, at 4–5.

															II

															To my mind, the due process questions
surrounding these relatively new civil forfeiture practices are
many. Start with the most fundamental one. The Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments guarantee that no government in this country may take
“life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” As
originally understood, this promise usually meant that a government
seeking to deprive an individual of her property could do so only
after a trial before a jury in which it (not the individual)
bore the burden of proof. See, e.g., 1 W. Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England 134–135 (1765) (Blackstone);
Vanhorne’s Lessee v. Dorrance, 2 Dall. 304, 315 (CC
Pa. 1795) (Patterson, J.); Wilkinson v. Leland, 2
Pet. 627, 657 (1829) (Story, J.). So how is it that, in civil
forfeiture, the government may confiscate property first and
provide process later?

															The answer, if there is one, turns on history.
If, as a rule, the Due Process Clauses require governments to
conduct a trial before taking property, some exceptions are just as
deeply rooted. And for just that reason, these exceptions, too, may
be consistent with the original meaning of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments. As this Court has put it, “a process of law
. . . must be taken to be due process of law” if it
enjoys “the sanction of settled usage both in England and in this
country.” Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S.
516, 528 (1884); see, e.g., Murray’s Lessee v.
Hoboken Land & Improvement Co., 18 How. 272, 278–280
(1856).

															But can contemporary civil forfeiture practices
boast that kind of pedigree? In Calero-Toledo v. Pearson
Yacht Leasing Co., 416 U.S.
663 (1974), this Court noted that English and early American
admiralty laws allowed the government to seize a vessel involved in
“piratical” or other maritime offenses and later initiate
postdeprivation civil forfeiture proceedings. Id., at 684.
The Court observed that similar legal rules existed for cases
involving “objects used in violation of the customs and revenue
laws.” Id., at 682; see also K. Arlyck, The Founders’
Forfeiture, 119 Colum. L. Rev. 1449, 1466 (2019). After
emphasizing the existence of those traditions, the Court proceeded
to uphold the civil forfeiture of a boat. Calero-Toledo, 416
U. S., at 682, 690. Later and proceeding on much the same
basis, the Court approved various aspects of civil forfeiture
practice in the context of customs enforcement actions. See
United States v. $8,850, 461
U.S. 555, 562, n. 12 (1983); United States v.
Von Neumann, 474 U.S.
242, 249, n. 7 (1986).

															These historical traditions suggest that
postdeprivation civil forfeiture processes in the discrete arenas
of admiralty, customs, and revenue law may satisfy the
Constitution. But as the Court stressed in Von Neumann, “the
general rule” remains that the government cannot “ ‘seize a
person’s property without a prior judicial determination
that the seizure is justified.’ ” Id., at 249,
n. 7. And it is far from clear to me whether the
postdeprivation practices historically tolerated inside the
admiralty, customs, and revenue contexts enjoy “the sanction of
settled usage” outside them. Hurtado, 110 U. S., at
528.

															The reasons for the law’s traditionally
permissive attitude toward civil forfeiture in those three contexts
may merit exploration, too. From a brief look, it seems they were
sometimes justified for reasons particular to their fields. In the
early Republic, for example, once a ship involved in violations of
the Nation’s piracy or customs laws slipped port for a foreign
destination, American courts often could not exercise jurisdiction
over it or its crew, let alone its owners. See R. Waples,
Proceedings in Rem §19, p. 22 (1882) (Waples). In many
instances, the law recognized that seizing the ship, subject to
postdeprivation procedures, represented “the only adequate means of
suppressing the offence or wrong, or insuring an indemnity to the
injured party.” Harmony v. United States, 2 How. 210,
233 (1844) (Story, J.); see also 3 Blackstone 262 (1768)
(justifying civil forfeiture in customs cases as necessary “to
secure such forfeited goods for the public use, though the offender
himself had escaped the reach of justice”). But if history
sanctions that line of thinking, it’s hard not to wonder: How does
any of that support the use of civil forfeiture in so many cases
today, where the government can secure personal jurisdiction
over the wrongdoer? And where seizing his property is not
the only adequate means of addressing his offense?

															Even supposing some modern civil forfeiture
regimes are able to claim the sanction of history, I wonder whether
all their particulars might. In the past, it seems the government
could confiscate only certain classes of property. So, for example,
admiralty statutes regularly authorized the government to seize and
pursue the civil forfeiture of “the instrument[s] of the offence,”
say, a ship used to engage in piracy. Smith v.
Maryland, 18 How. 71, 75 (1855); see Harmony, 2 How.,
at 233. But statutes like that did not necessarily mean forfeiture
extended to the vessel’s cargo, and courts were loath to assume
they did. Id., at 235. Today, by contrast, civil forfeiture
statutes routinely permit governments to confiscate not just
instruments used in an offense, but other “facilitating” property
as well. See supra, at 3. (In this respect, Alabama’s
statute is again illustrative.) And if that difference seems a
small one, it is anything but: It is the difference between being
able to confiscate the materials and equipment used to produce an
illicit drug and being able to confiscate someone’s car after he
used it as the site to conduct a single drug transaction as either
buyer or seller. See Austin v. United States,
509 U.S.
602, 627–628 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment).

															Even in the areas where the law tolerated civil
forfeiture, earlier generations tempered some of its harshest
features. Courts, for example, ordinarily entertained “overwhelming
necessity” as a defense to “the violation of revenue laws” that
might otherwise justify forfeiture. 1 J. Bishop, Commentaries on
the Criminal Law §697, p. 575 (1856) (Bishop); see
Peisch v. Ware, 4 Cranch 347, 363 (1808) (Marshall,
C. J.) (“[A] forfeiture can only be applied to those cases in
which the means that are prescribed for the prevention of a
forfeiture may be employed”). Some statutes permitted the owner to
avoid forfeiture by proving that the violation “proceeded from
accident or mistake.” 1Stat. 677; see United States
v. Nine Packages of Linen, 27 F. Cas. 154, 157 (No. 15,884)
(CC NY 1818); Bishop §697, at 575; cf. 3Stat. 183 (no forfeiture of
goods from “bona fide purchaser”). Others empowered the Treasury
Secretary himself to afford the same remedy—and evidence suggests
officials “were exceedingly liberal in their use of the
. . . power, granting relief in the overwhelming majority
of cases presented to them.” Arlyck, 119 Colum. L. Rev., at
1487; see also The Laura, 114 U.S.
411, 414–415 (1885). These days, meanwhile, many civil
forfeiture statutes lack some or all of these mitigating features.
I acknowledge that this Court has suggested an innocent owner
defense is not always constitutionally required. Bennis v.
Michigan, 516 U.S.
442, 443 (1996); see id., at 455–457 (Thomas, J.,
concurring) (discussing limits to the Court’s holding); id.,
at 457–458 (Ginsburg, J., concurring) (same). But even putting that
debate aside, what of early forfeiture’s other ameliorative
attributes?

															It appears, too, that time was often of the
essence in traditional civil forfeiture practice. So, for example,
an early federal statute permitting forfeiture for nonpayment of
internal duties “enjoined” the “collector” “to cause suits for
[forfeiture] to be commenced without delay, and prosecuted to
effect.” 3Stat. 242. In an admiralty case, Chief Justice Marshall
remarked, “If the seizing officer should refuse to institute
proceedings to ascertain the forfeiture, the district court may,
upon the application of the aggrieved party, compel the officer to
proceed to adjudication, or to abandon the seizure.” Slocum
v. Mayberry, 2 Wheat. 1, 10 (1817). And in many instances
owners could recover their property while the forfeiture
proceedings were ongoing by posting a bond. See,
e.g., 3Stat. 242; United States v.
Ames, 99 U.S.
35, 36 (1879); Waples §81, at 112; ante, at 12. It’s
another feature of historic practice that raises questions about
current ones in which even innocent owners can wait for months or
years for forfeiture proceedings to play out.

															III

															Why does a Nation so jealous of its liberties
tolerate expansive new civil forfeiture practices that have “led to
egregious and well-chronicled abuses”? Leonard, 580
U. S., at 1180 (statement of Thomas, J.). Perhaps it has
something to do with the relative lack of power of those on whom
the system preys. Perhaps government agencies’ increasing
dependence on forfeiture as a source of revenue is an important
piece of the puzzle. Cf. Calero-Toledo, 416 U. S., at
679 (indicating, over 50 years ago and before the rise of many
modern innovations, that “self-interes[t]” did not motivate the
forfeiture of the vessel at issue). But maybe, too, part of the
reason lies closer to home. In this Nation, the right to a jury
trial before the government may take life, liberty, or property has
always been the rule. Yes, some exceptions exist. But perhaps it is
past time for this Court to examine more fully whether and to what
degree contemporary civil forfeiture practices align with that rule
and those exceptions.

															Really, it’s hard not to wonder whether some
current civil forfeiture practices represent much less than a
revival of the archaic common-law deodand. The deodand required the
forfeiture of any object responsible for a death—say, a knife,
cart, or horse—to the Crown. See 1 Blackstone 290. Today, the idea
seems much the same even if the practice now sweeps more broadly,
requiring almost any object involved in almost any serious offense
to be surrendered to the government in amends.

															The hardships deodands often imposed seem more
than faintly familiar, too. Deodands required forfeiture regardless
of the fault of the owner, himself sometimes the deceased. Not
infrequently, the practice left impoverished families without the
means to support themselves, faced not only with the loss of a
loved one but also with the loss of a horse or perhaps a cart
essential to their livelihoods. See 2 F. Pollock & F. Maitland,
The History of English Law 472 (1895); E. Burke, Deodand—A Legal
Antiquity That May Still Exist, 8 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 15, 17,
19–20 (1930). Sometimes grieving families could persuade
authorities or juries to forgo a deodand, but often not, and
generally the burden to avoid a deodand was on them. See M. Foster,
Crown Law 266 (1762).

															As time went on, too, curiously familiar
financial incentives wormed their way into the system. Originally,
the Crown was supposed to pass the deodand (literally, a thing
given to God) onto the church “as an expiation for the sou[l]” of
the deceased. 1 Blackstone 290. Over time, though, the Crown
increasingly chose instead to sell off its rights to deodands to
local lords and others. These recipients inevitably wound up with a
strong interest in the perpetuation of the enterprise. See
id., at 292. Ultimately, the deodand’s appeal faded in
England, and this Court has held that it “did not become part of
the common-law tradition of this country.” Calero-Toledo,
416 U. S., at 682; see id., at 681, n. 19. But has
something not wholly unlike it gradually reemerged in our own
lifetimes?

															*

															In asking the questions I do today, I do not
profess a comprehensive list, let alone any firm answers. Nor does
the way the parties have chosen to litigate this case give cause to
supply them. But in future cases, with the benefit of full
briefing, I hope we might begin the task of assessing how well the
profound changes in civil forfeiture practices we have witnessed in
recent decades comport with the Constitution’s enduring guarantee
that “[n]o person shall . . . be deprived of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law.”

													
