::decision_cite:: 22-585
::decision_name::  Culley v. Marshall
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–585

															_________________

															HALIMA TARIFFA CULLEY, et al.,
PETITIONERS v. STEVEN T. MARSHALL, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF
ALABAMA, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the eleventh circuit

															[May 9, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, dissenting.

															A police officer can seize your car if he claims
it is connected to a crime committed by someone else. The police
department can then keep the car for months or even years until the
State ultimately seeks ownership of it through civil forfeiture. In
most States, the resulting proceeds from the car’s sale go to the
police department’s budget. Petitioners claim that the Due Process
Clause requires a prompt, post-seizure opportunity for innocent car
owners to argue to a judge why they should retain their cars
pending that final forfeiture determination. When an officer has a
financial incentive to hold onto a car and an owner pleads
innocence, they argue, a retention hearing at least ensures that
the officer has probable cause to connect the owner and the car to
a crime.

															Today, the Court holds that the Due Process
Clause never requires that minimal safeguard. In doing so, it
sweeps far more broadly than the narrow question presented and
hamstrings lower courts from addressing myriad abuses of the civil
forfeiture system. Because I would have decided only which due
process test governs whether a retention hearing is required and
left it to the lower courts to apply that test to different civil
forfeiture schemes, I respectfully dissent.

															I

															A

															Civil forfeiture occupies a murky space
between criminal forfeiture and ordinary government deprivations of
property. Criminal forfeiture is part of a defendant’s criminal
punishment. The government must therefore proceed against the
person (in personam) to obtain someone’s property via
criminal forfeiture, which generally requires notice of intent to
forfeit the property in a criminal indictment and full criminal
procedural protections for the defendant. At the outset, the
government must typically prove that it has probable cause to seize
the person for a specific crime and therefore to hold any property
related to that crime. See Gerstein v. Pugh,
420 U.S.
103 (1975).

															Outside the criminal context, the government
usually must provide a hearing before depriving someone of
essential property. See, e.g., Goldberg v.
Kelly, 397 U.S.
254, 264–266 (1970) (public assistance); Bell v.
Burson, 402 U.S.
535, 542–543 (1971) (driver’s license); Fuentes v.
Shevin, 407 U.S.
67, 96–97 (1972) (household goods to which a creditor lays a
claim). In some circumstances “the necessity of quick action by the
State” may prevent a predeprivation hearing. Parratt v.
Taylor, 451 U.S.
527, 539 (1981), overruled on other grounds, Daniels v.
Williams, 474 U.S.
327 (1986). Then, however, the government must make
“availab[le] . . . some meaningful means by which to assess the
propriety of the State’s action at some time after the initial
[seizure], [to] satisfy the requirements of procedural due
process.” 451 U. S., at 539.

															Civil forfeiture is a hybrid, where prosecutors
proceed against any property (in rem) they believe is
connected to a crime, even when the owner is innocent. Unlike
criminal forfeiture, civil forfeiture proceedings are untethered
from any criminal prosecution. In fact, as many as 80% of civil
forfeitures are not accompanied by any ultimate criminal
conviction. Brief for Buckeye Institute as Amicus Curiae 14.
Civil forfeiture is unnecessary where the government pursues
criminal forfeiture in an indictment and sustains a conviction.
Only if an officer seizes property that he believes is connected to
a crime, but does not belong to a defendant charged with that
crime, must prosecutors bring civil forfeiture proceedings outside
a criminal case. Even when the State abandons the prosecution that
formed the basis for the seizure, an innocent property owner can be
left in civil forfeiture proceedings trying to get her property
back.

															B

															The Federal Government, States, and localities
set their own rules for civil forfeiture, subject only to the
limits of the Due Process Clause. This lack of standardized
procedural safeguards makes civil forfeiture vulnerable to abuse.
In 32 States and the federal system, when law enforcement agencies
forfeit property, the proceeds go to their own budgets. Brief for
Institute for Justice et al. as Amici Curiae 4. As a
result, police agencies often have a financial incentive to seize
as many cars as possible and try to retain them. The forfeiture
revenue is not a supplement; many police agencies in fact depend on
cash flow from forfeitures for their budgets. See,
e.g., J. Worrall & T. Kovandzic, Is Policing for
Profit? Answers From Asset Forfeiture, 7 Criminology & Pub.
Pol’y 219, 222 (2008) (“[M]ore than 60% of police agencies surveyed
reported dependence on asset forfeiture”). These cash incentives
not only encourage counties to create labyrinthine processes for
retrieving property in the hopes that innocent owners will abandon
attempts at recovery, they also influence which laws police
enforce, how they enforce them, and who they enforce them against.
See Brief for Buckeye Institute as Amicus Curiae 6–20
(detailing empirical studies on the effect of fiscal incentives in
civil forfeiture on law enforcement decisionmaking).

															Police officers have an incentive to enforce the
law in a way that leads to the recovery of fungible property, like
cash or cars. For example, officers might pose as drug dealers
instead of buyers in a sting operation, because “it allows police
to seize a buyer’s cash rather than a seller’s drugs (which have no
legal value to the seizing agency).” E. Blumenson & E. Nilsen,
Policing for Profit: The Drug War’s Hidden Economic Agenda, 65 U.
Chi. L. Rev. 35, 67 (1998). Similarly, police officers might
target low-level drug possession in cars instead of drug
transactions on the street, so that they can seize the vehicle. In
this case, police officers pulled over petitioner Halima Tariffa
Culley’s college-age son while he was driving a car registered to
her, charged him with possession of marijuana, and seized the car.
A police officer cannot sell recovered marijuana and a prosecutor’s
office does not ordinarily pursue low-level marijuana offenses.
When a police department can recover the proceeds from a car
civilly forfeited in connection to a low-level marijuana offense,
however, targeting that offense becomes more appealing.

															Moreover, officers have a financial incentive to
target marginalized groups, such as low-income communities of
color, who are less likely to have the resources to challenge the
forfeiture in court. See A. Crawford, Civil Asset Forfeiture in
Massachusetts: A Flawed Incentive Structure and Its Impact on
Indigent Property Owners, 35 Boston College J. L. & Soc.
Justice 257, 274–277 (2015) (“[O]ne way for law enforcement
agencies to generate profits is to target low-income parties who
are financially incapable of challenging seizures”). A 2019 study
found that “the seizure of nonnarcotic property from black and
Hispanic arrestees increases with the size of the [budget] deficit
in states where police departments can retain revenue from seized
property.” M. Makowsky, T. Stratmann, & A. Tabarrok, To Serve
and Collect: The Fiscal and Racial Determinants of Law Enforcement,
48 J. Legal Studies 189, 208–209 (2019).

															“[T]hese same groups are often the most burdened
by forfeiture,” because “they are more likely to suffer in their
daily lives while they litigate for the return of a critical item
of property, such as a car.” Leonard v. Texas, 580
U.S. 1178, 1180 (2017) (statement of Thomas, J., respecting denial
of certiorari). For many people, loss of access to a car, even
temporarily, is significant. Over 85% of Americans drive to work.
J. Hirsch & P. Jones, Driver’s License Suspension for Unpaid
Fines and Fees: The Movement for Reform, 54 U. Mich. J. L.
Reform 875, 881 (2020). Unsurprisingly, studies have found a link
between the inability to drive and the loss of a job. For example,
“[i]n New Jersey, 42% of people lost their jobs after their
driver’s license was suspended.” Ibid. Loss of a car not
only “takes away one’s ability to commute” but also imposes a
barrier to “buy[ing] necessities, access[ing] healthcare, and
visit[ing] family members, pharmacies, grocery stores, hospitals,
and other essential services.” Ibid.

															Given these burdens, low-income communities are
also the most vulnerable to pressure from unchecked prosecutors,
who can use coercive civil forfeiture processes to extract
settlement money from innocent owners desperate to get their
property back. See Brief for Institute for Justice et al. as
Amici Curiae 19–20 (detailing examples). In Detroit, to take
one example, car owners recently alleged that Wayne County seizes
vehicles in areas generally associated with crime and holds on to
the vehicles and their contents unless the owners pay steep
redemption fees: $900 for the first seizure; $1,800 for the second;
and $2,700 for the third. See Ingram v. Wayne Cty.,
81 F. 4th 603, 606 (CA6 2023). If the owner is unwilling or unable
to pay this fee, she must either abandon the vehicle or wait for
county prosecutors to decide whether to initiate forfeiture
proceedings. Before such proceedings are brought, however, the
owner allegedly must attend four or more pretrial conferences
during regular work hours, during which the owner typically will
not get to plead her case to a judge. Instead, prosecutors will
attempt to persuade her to pay the redemption fee, towing costs,
and storage fees. Missing just one conference allegedly will result
in automatic forfeiture and transfer of title to the county.

															Similarly, in Massachusetts, one investigation
found over 500 instances in a single county where law enforcement
held property for a decade or more before officials finally
commenced forfeiture proceedings. S. Datar & S. Dooling,
Massachusetts Police Can Easily Seize Your Money. The DA of One
County Makes It Nearly Impossible To Get It Back, ProPublica (Aug.
18, 2021),
www.propublica.org/article/massachusetts-police-can-easily-seize-your-money.-the-da-of-one-county-makes-it-near-impossible-to-get-it-back.
In other words, those owners had to wait more than a decade for the
chance to explain to a judge why they should get their property
back. In one instance, prosecutors ran a newspaper notice four
years after a seizure, at which point the property owner had only
20 days to file a claim to avoid forfeiture. Similar delays have
been reported in South Carolina, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. See
Brief for Institute for Justice et al. as Amici Curiae
16 (collecting studies).

															In short, law enforcement can seize cars, hold
them indefinitely, and then rely on an owner’s lack of resources to
forfeit those cars to fund agency budgets, all without any initial
check by a judge as to whether there is a basis to hold the car in
the first place.

															II

															This Court granted certiorari to address which
of its tests should govern due process challenges that seek a
retention hearing after an officer seizes a car.[1] Now, the Court reaches far beyond that
question to hold that people whose cars are seized by the police
never have a due process right to a retention hearing. The Court
arrives at this conclusion by relying on two customs cases from the
1980s and historical practice that purportedly reinforces their
application. Its reasoning is deeply flawed.

															A

															The majority says that “[t]his Court’s
decisions in $8,850 and Von Neumann resolve this
case.” Ante, at 8. These cases, however, have little to say
about what due process requires when an innocent owner seeks to
retain her car pending an ultimate forfeiture determination in
schemes like those described above. Instead, the claimants in these
cases argued that the United States Customs Service took too long
to resolve forfeiture proceedings against property seized at the
border as part of the claimants’ own alleged violations of customs
law.

															In United States v. $8,850,
461
U.S. 555, 558 (1983), a customs inspector seized $8,850 in cash
from Mary Josephine Vasquez, who had declared she was carrying less
than $5,000. Vasquez was charged with a felony and a misdemeanor,
with the indictment seeking forfeiture of the $8,850 as part of the
misdemeanor charge. When a jury ultimately convicted Vasquez of
only the felony count, which did not contain the forfeiture
allegations, the Government finally filed civil forfeiture
proceedings against the cash. Vasquez argued only that the
Government’s 18-month delay in filing civil forfeiture proceedings
was unconstitutionally long. To evaluate her claim, the Court
borrowed the Barker v. Wingo multifactor test from
the speedy-trial context and held that “the balance of factors
indicate[d] that the Government’s delay . . . was reasonable” in
the circumstances. 461 U. S., at 569; see id., at 564
(citing Barker v. Wingo, 407
U.S. 514 (1972)). In so holding, the Court emphasized that the
Government had “diligent[ly]” pursued the pending criminal
proceedings against Vasquez. 461 U. S., at 568. Because a
conviction on the misdemeanor count could have rendered civil
forfeiture unnecessary, the Government’s delay in filing a civil
forfeiture proceeding was understandable. Ibid.

															In United States v. Von Neumann,
474 U.S.
242, 245 (1986), Von Neumann failed to declare a newly
purchased Jaguar Panther car to customs officials when he drove it
back to the United States. United States Customs seized the
car, and Von Neumann filed a petition for administrative remission
proceedings the same day. Two weeks later, he posted a bond and
regained possession of the car. Thirty-six days after he filed his
remission petition, Customs resolved it by reducing Von Neumann’s
penalty for failure to declare to $3,600.

															Von Neumann argued that the 36-day delay in
responding to his administrative remission petition violated due
process. The Government responded that “due process considerations
do not govern the Secretary’s disposition of [administrative]
remission petitions.” Id., at 249. The Court agreed with the
Government. “Implicit in this Court’s discussion of timeliness in
$8,850 was the view that the [regular civil] forfeiture
proceeding, without more, provides the postseizure hearing required
by due process to protect Von Neumann’s property interest in [his]
car.” Id., at 249. The administrative proceedings did not
trigger a separate due process right, the Court continued, because
they were discretionary and “not necessary to a forfeiture
determination.” Id., at 250.

															The Court then declined to address the argument
that the remission statute “itself creates a property right which
cannot be taken away without due process.” Ibid. “[E]ven if
respondent had such a property right,” the Court explained, “any
due process requirement of timely disposition was more than
adequately provided here.” Ibid. The Court had “already
noted that his right to a forfeiture proceeding meeting the
Barker test satisfies any due process right with respect to
the car and the money.” Id., at 251. Von Neumann had also
failed to show “what prejudice [he] suffered from the 36-day delay
in the response” to his remission petition. Id., at 250.

															The majority takes Von Neumann’s
imprecise categorical language out of this vital context to hold
that “a timely forfeiture hearing ‘satisfies any due process right’
with respect to a ‘car’ that has been seized for civil forfeiture.”
Ante, at 8 (quoting Von Neumann, 474 U. S., at
251).[2] In doing so, it
extends the holdings of both Von Neumann and $8,850
to situations neither Court contemplated. In both, the Government
sought to forfeit property tied to the claimants’ unlawful conduct.
The claimants were not, and did not claim to be, innocent owners of
property used for criminal ends without their knowledge. Unlike
petitioners here, neither the claimant in $8,850 nor the
claimant in Von Neumann had argued that a retention hearing
was necessary to test Customs’ justification for seizing their
property at the outset. Instead, both argued only that the
Government took too long to resolve their proceedings: in
$8,850 through a statutory process, and in Von
Neumann through a discretionary administrative one. The
majority’s reading here improperly resolves a constitutional
challenge that the Court in those cases had no cause or reason to
address.

															B

															With the sole exception of the Eleventh
Circuit, every court of appeals has rejected Von Neumann’s
application to state and county civil forfeiture schemes concerning
claimants’ cars.[3] Indeed,
this Court has distinguished Von Neumann in contexts where
officers have a financial incentive to seize property and owners
may assert innocence of the underlying crime as a defense. In
United States v. James Daniel Good Real Property,
510 U.S.
43, 46 (1993), for example, this Court held that the Government
must conduct a predeprivation hearing before it seizes real
property connected to criminal conduct through civil forfeiture.
Four years after James Daniel Good pleaded guilty to state charges
based on drugs found in his home, the Federal Government filed
civil forfeiture proceedings against his home. Even though Good did
not assert innocence, the Court emphasized that proceedings without
a predeprivation hearing created an unacceptable risk of error for
property owners asserting an “innocent owner” defense, because
waiting until the final forfeiture hearing “ ‘would not cure
the temporary deprivation that an earlier hearing might have
prevented.’ ” Id., at 56. Crucial to the Court’s
reasoning was the fact that “the Government has a direct pecuniary
interest in the outcome of the proceeding” when it is entitled to
forfeit the property. Id., at 55–56.

															This reasoning applies directly to due process
challenges where police seize the cars of innocent owners and use
forfeiture proceeds to fund department budgets. The narrow holdings
of $8,850 and Von Neumann should not determine the
due process claims of every claimant deprived of access to her car
by state prosecutors on untested grounds for months or years.

															III

															The majority’s categorical rule that due
process never requires a retention hearing also cannot be squared
with the context-specific analysis that this Court’s due process
doctrine requires. “ ‘[D]ue process,’ unlike some legal rules,
is not a technical conception with a fixed content unrelated to
time, place and circumstances.” Cafeteria & Restaurant
Workers v. McElroy, 367 U.S.
886, 895 (1961) (alteration in original). “[D]ue process is
flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the
particular situation demands.” Morrissey v. Brewer,
408 U.S.
471, 481 (1972).

															The Court granted this case to resolve which of
two flexible due process tests should govern, not to resolve
whether due process ever requires a retention hearing in civil
forfeiture schemes. That difference is important. An appropriately
context-specific due process test should not always yield the same
result when applied to different schemes. Of the six Circuits that
have applied the test from Mathews v. Eldridge,
424 U.S.
319 (1976), to various civil forfeiture schemes, three have
held that due process requires a retention hearing, Ingram,
81 F. 4th, at 620; Smith v. Chicago, 524 F.3d 834,
838 (CA7 2008), vacated as moot, Alvarez v. Smith,
558 U.S.
87 (2009); Krimstock v. Kelly, 
306 F.3d 40, 67–68 (CA2 2002) (Sotomayor, J.), and three have
held that it does not, Serrano v. CBP, 975 F.3d 488,
500–502 (CA5 2020) (per curiam); Booker v.
St. Paul, 762 F.3d 730, 736–737 (CA8 2014); United
States v. One 1971 BMW, 652 F.2d 817, 820–821 (CA9
1981). That result is consistent with the flexible dictates of any
due process test, which should take into account all the component
parts of an individual scheme.

															For instance, petitioners had the right to post
a bond to get back their vehicles, the right to move for summary
judgment in the forfeiture proceeding itself, and the opportunity
to seek separate relief under the Alabama Rules of Criminal
Procedure for an illegal seizure. The adequacy of those alternative
procedures was never briefed below because the only question was
which test should apply. By contrast, the New York City scheme that
the Second Circuit concluded violated due process lacked all of
those procedures. See Krimstock, 306 F. 3d, at 55,
59–60. Differences in the adequacy of available procedures can and
should result in different due process outcomes.

															Instead of answering the question presented and
then remanding to the lower court to apply the appropriate test,
the majority instead holds that due process never requires a
retention hearing. The majority acknowledges that “the States and
Congress have adopted a wide variety of approaches.” Ante,
at 14. Yet it prescribes a categorical constitutional rule for all
of them. The Court today hamstrings federal courts from conducting
a context-specific analysis in civil forfeiture schemes that are
less generous than the one here.

															IV

															The majority’s holding relates only to
retention hearings. It does not foreclose other potential due
process challenges to civil forfeiture proceedings. See
ante, at 8, n. 3. People who have their property seized
by police remain free to challenge other abuses in the civil
forfeiture system. For instance, such claimants could challenge
notice of a forfeiture posted only in a newspaper, the lack of a
neutral adjudicator at an initial hearing, or the standard of proof
necessary to seize a car. Lower courts remain free to apply
Mathews to those claims. See ante, at 9. Due process
also still “requires a timely post-seizure forfeiture
hearing,” ante, at 5, so claimants may continue to challenge
unreasonable delays.[4]

															The abuses of many civil forfeiture systems are
well documented. See, e.g., supra,
at 3–6. I commend States or localities that have adopted
retention hearings as a way of guarding against those abuses. See,
e.g., Brief for Legal Aid Society as Amicus
Curiae (detailing the benefits of New York City’s prompt
postseizure hearings). Other States and localities should not view
today’s decision as precluding them from following suit and
adopting similar measures.

															*  *  *

															The majority today holds that due process
never requires the minimal check of a retention hearing before a
police officer deprives an innocent owner of her car for months or
years. Given the diverse schemes adopted by States, some with
adequate safeguards and some without, the Court should have just
answered the question presented. Instead, it announces a universal
rule for all schemes without heeding the dictates of this Court’s
due process precedents that require a scheme-specific analysis.
Because I instead would have answered the question presented and
left lower courts the flexibility to apply the appropriate test in
these myriad circumstances, I respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
 See Pet. for Cert. i (“In
determining whether the Due Process Clause requires a state or
local government to provide a post seizure probable cause hearing
prior to a statutory judicial forfeiture proceeding and, if so,
when such a hearing must take place, should district courts apply
the ‘speedy trial’ test employed in United States v.
$8,850, 461 U.S.
555 (1983) and Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S.
514 (1972), as held by the Eleventh Circuit or the three-part
due process analysis set forth in Mathews v.
Eldridge, 424 U.S.
319 (1976) as held by at least the Second, Fifth, Seventh, and
Ninth Circuits”).
2
 Perhaps recognizing that
it stretches the reasoning of the opinion, the majority relies in a
footnote on statements made at oral argument. See ante, at
8, n. 2.
3
 See Ingram v.
Wayne Cty., 81 F. 4th 603, 616–617 (CA6 2023);
Serrano v. CBP, 975 F.3d 488, 500 (CA5 2020)
(per curiam); Smith v. Chicago, 524 F.3d
834, 837–838 (CA7 2008), vacated as moot, Alvarez v.
Smith, 558 U.S.
87 (2009); Krimstock v. Kelly, 
306 F.3d 40, 52, n. 12 (CA2 2002) (Sotomayor, J.); cf.
Booker v. St. Paul, 762 F.3d 730 (CA8 2014)
(declining to reference Von Neumann).
4
 Courts applying the
Barker factors to due process challenges of unreasonable
delay should not apply a narrower version of that test than the one
this Court articulated in $8,850. The $8,850 Court
emphasized that Barker is a “flexible” test, and “none of
[its] factors is a necessary or sufficient condition for finding
unreasonable delay.” United States v. $8,850,
461 U.S.
555, 564–565 (1983); see also Barker v. Wingo,
407 U.S.
514, 533 (1972) (“[T]hese factors have no talismanic qualities;
courts must still engage in a difficult and sensitive balancing
process”). The factors are merely “guides in balancing the
interests of the claimant and the Government to assess whether the
basic due process requirement of fairness has been satisfied in a
particular case.” $8,850, 461 U. S., at 565. In the
civil forfeiture context, “the balance of the interests, which
depends so heavily on the context of the particular situation, may
differ from a situation involving the right to a speedy trial.”
Ibid., n. 14. Recognizing that the Barker and
Mathews balancing tests have similar aims and factors, the
Government notes that the tests are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae, at
20–22.


