::decision_cite:: 22-666
::decision_name::  Wilkinson v. Garland
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–666

															_________________

															Situ Kamu Wilkinson, PETITIONER v.
Merrick B. Garland, Attorney General

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the third circuit

															[March 19, 2024]

															

															Justice Alito, with whom The Chief Justice and
Justice Thomas join, dissenting.

															In the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA), 110Stat. 3009–546, Congress
sought to control illegal immigration and streamline the procedures
for removing illegal aliens who had been convicted of criminal
offenses. A key provision of the Act is 8 U. S. C.
§1252(a)(2)(B)(i), which provides that “no court shall have
jurisdiction to review . . . any judgment regarding the
granting” of certain forms of discretionary relief. After IIRIRA’s
enactment, this Court flagged a “substantial constitutional
questio[n]” that would arise if federal habeas courts were stripped
of jurisdiction to review “pure question[s] of law.” INS v.
St. Cyr, 533 U.S.
289, 300 (2001). Congress responded by enacting an amendment
clarifying that §1252(a)(2)(B) did not “preclud[e] review of
constitutional claims or questions of law.” §1252(a)(2)(D).

															I

															In Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr,
589 U.S. 221 (2020), this Court addressed the meaning of this
amendment. The case concerned two criminal aliens who were ordered
removed and then failed to ask to have their removal proceedings
reopened by the 90-day statutory deadline. They argued, however,
that the deadline should be equitably tolled. The Board of
Immigration Appeals (BIA) rejected that argument, and the issue
before us was whether the Court of Appeals had jurisdiction to
review such a decision under §1252(a)(2)(B) and §1252(a)(2)(D).

															The answer to that question depended on whether
the correctness of the BIA’s decisions was a “questio[n] of law”
within the meaning of §1252(a)(2)(D). The aliens urged us to decide
the case on “narrow grounds.” Brief for Petitioners in
Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr, O. T. 2019, No. 18–776
etc., p. 15. They did not dispute the relevant facts, see 589
U. S., at 226, but argued that the BIA had applied the wrong
legal test in holding that they had not acted with sufficient
diligence to justify equitable tolling—specifically, that the BIA
had demanded a demonstration of “ ‘maximum feasible
diligence’ ” rather than “ ‘reasonable diligence,’ ”
which they claimed was the right test. Brief for Petitioners in
Guerrero-Lasprilla, at 15.

															The Court ruled for the aliens and in doing so
stated broadly that “questions of law” include all questions that
involve the application of the law to a particular set of facts.
589 U. S., at 228. Under this statement, the phrase “questions
of law” has a stunning sweep. It encompasses all sorts of
discretionary rulings that depend almost entirely on the relevant
facts, as a few examples of mundane trial court rulings illustrate.
For one, take a trial court’s denial of a request for a continuance
or a decision about the length of a trial day or the days of the
week during which a jury is required to sit. See Morris v.
Slappy, 461 U.S.
1, 11 (1983). Such decisions are governed by a legal standard,
albeit a very permissive one: the decisions cannot be “unreasoning
and arbitrary.” Ibid. But in the rare case in which such a
decision is reversed on appeal, the appellate court is unlikely to
say that the trial court made an error of law because it mistakenly
thought a continuance would be unreasonable and arbitrary. Instead,
the question on appeal would almost certainly be based on an
assessment of the facts.

															Here is another example. Under the broad
language of Guerrero-Lasprilla, juries decide questions of
law whenever they return a verdict in a criminal or civil case. If,
for example, a jury in a criminal case finds that a defendant
violated a statute that requires “knowing” conduct, the jury
decides a question of law because it applies the law (as set out in
the court’s instructions on the meaning of “knowing” conduct, see,
e.g., 2B K. O’Malley, J. Grenig, & W. Lee, Federal Jury
Practice and Instructions, Criminal §70:07 (6th ed. 2010), to the
facts as they see them. Likewise, in a routine negligence case, the
jury applies the law (as explained in the court’s instructions on
the meaning of “negligence,” see, e.g., 3A id., Civil
§155:30 (2012), to the facts shown at trial.

															When Congress responded to St. Cyr by
enacting §1252(a)(2)(D), did it mean to adopt this maximalist
understanding of “questions of law”? St. Cyr never suggested
that Congress was obligated to go that far, and if Congress had
wanted to achieve the end that results from the Court’s broad
statements in Guerrero-Lasprilla, Congress might as well
have repealed §1252(a)(2)(B) outright. Under the
Guerrero-Lasprilla formulation, the net effect of
§1252(a)(2)(B) and §1252(a)(2)(D) is as follows. Before the
enactment of those provisions, pure findings of fact were subject
to review, but under a very deferential standard—namely, they could
be overturned only if “ ‘any reasonable adjudicator would be
compelled to conclude to the contrary.’ ” Nasrallah v.
Barr, 590 U.S. 573, 584 (2020). Afterwards, pure findings of
fact were not reviewable at all. Is it plausible that this
pipsqueak of a change was Congress’s cure for what it saw as undue
delay in the conclusion of removal proceedings for criminal aliens?
I hardly think so.

															II

															I dissented in Guerrero-Lasprilla
because I feared that the Court’s sweeping language would lead to
“absurd results in light of the statute’s structure” and would
“transform §1252(a)(2)(D)’s narrow exception into a broad provision
permitting judicial review of all criminal aliens’ challenges to
their removal proceedings except the precious few that raise only
pure questions of fact.” 589 U. S., at 238, 240 (Thomas, J.,
joined by Alito, J., dissenting). Under this reading, “the
exception” for “questions of law” “all but swallows the rule.”
Id., at 241.

															We are permitted to exercise at least a modicum
of “ ‘common sense’ ” when we interpret a statute, see
West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U.S. 697, 722 (2022), and
Guerrero-Lasprilla’s broad language defies common sense. If
the Congress that enacted §1252(a)(2)(D) had wanted to bring about
the result that the broad statements in Guerrero-Lasprilla
suggest, it could have simply repealed §1252(a)(2)(B) and stated in
§1252(a)(2)(D) that courts cannot review pure questions of fact.
Qualifying the broad prohibition in §1252(a)(2)(D) by adding an
exception that all but eliminates the prohibition would have been a
very odd way of achieving that result. What the Court says that
Congress did—combining the broad prohibition in §1252(a)(2)(B) with
the nearly congruent exception in §1252(a)(2)(D)—would be the
equivalent of a city council adopting an ordinance banning all dogs
from a park with an exception for all dogs that weigh under 125
pounds. Or the council passes an ordinance prohibiting all persons
from riding a bicycle without a helmet but then adopts an exception
for all persons under the age of 90. When Congress enacted
§1252(a)(2)(D), it was not engaging in such silliness.

															III

															Accepting of the judgment in
Guerrero-Lasprilla—that the BIA’s understanding of the scope
of equitable estoppel is a question of law—does not require that we
take the language in the Court’s opinion to the outer limits of its
possible reach. But that is what the Court has now done. As Justice
Breyer, the author of the opinion in Guerrero-Lasprilla,
recognized in an earlier opinion for the Court, the concept of a
question of law does not always encompass all applications of the
law to a set of facts. In Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. v.
Albrecht, 587 U.S. 299 (2019), the decision hung on the
question whether the Food and Drug Administration would have
approved a change in a drug’s label. The Court recognized that this
question contained both legal and factual elements, but the Court
did not hold that the question was one of law simply because it
involved the application of law to a set of facts. Id., at
316–318. Rather, the Court considered which element was most likely
to be contested and asked whether the answer to the question
whether the FDA would have approved the change would generally turn
on a judgment about the law or the facts. Ibid.

															If that same mode of analysis is applied here,
the answer is clear—and it is the opposite of the one given by the
Court. Whether “removal would result in exceptional and extremely
unusual hardship” to the “spouse, parent, or child” of the alien
subject to removal is overwhelmingly a question of fact.
§1229b(b)(1)(D). The only legal component consists of the meaning
of the everyday terms “hardship,” “exceptional,” and “unusual.”

															The facts of this case illustrate the degree to
which the factual element involved in the question at hand
overwhelms the slim legal component. Below, petitioner argued that
the Immigration Judge misunderstood “the depth of the emotional
relationship between Petitioner and his Child,” the amount of “care
and support that Petitioner’s Child would receive if Petitioner is
removed,” and “the Child’s uncommon and difficult situation, in
light of his family’s unwillingness to provide him access to care
for his mental health needs.” Brief for Petitioner in No. 21–3166
(CA3), pp. 16–17. All those issues are entirely factual, and there
is no legal principle that can help an immigration judge, the BIA,
or a court assess whether any “hardship” resulting from
petitioner’s removal would be “exceptional and extremely unusual.”
That question must be decided by the application of what the
decision-maker knows from experience about human nature and family
relationships. Consequently, the question should not be classified
as a “question of law” under §1252(a)(2)(D).

															The Court, however, reads
Guerrero-Lasprilla as broadly as possible. As it sees
things, all “[m]ixed questions” are “questions of law,” even if
they are “primarily factual.” Ante, at 15. And since the
question here is overwhelmingly factual, what the Court seems to
mean by “primarily” is anything that falls short of 100%.

															That is not what Congress meant when it enacted
§1252(a)(2)(B) and §1252(a)(2)(D), and I therefore respectfully
dissent.

													
