::decision_cite:: 22-6389
::decision_name::  Brown v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before
publication in the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United
States, Washington, D. C. 20543, pio@supremecourt.gov, of any
typographical or other formal errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 22–6389 and 22–6640

															_________________

															Justin Rashaad Brown, PETITIONER

															22–6389v.

															United States

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the third circuit

															Eugene Jackson, PETITIONER

															22–6640v.

															United States

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the eleventh circuit

															[May 23, 2024]

															Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the Court.

															These cases concern the application of the Armed Career Criminal
Act (ACCA) to state drug convictions that occurred before recent
technical amendments to the federal drug schedules. ACCA imposes a
15-year mandatory minimum sentence on defendants who are convicted
for the illegal possession of a firearm and have a criminal history
that is thought to demonstrate a propensity for violence. These
defendants are subject to ACCA’s enhanced penalty if, among other
things, they have “three previous convictions” for “a serious drug
offense.”18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1). For a state crime to
qualify as a “serious drug offense,” it must carry a maximum
sentence of at least 10 years’ imprisonment, and it must “involv[e]
. . . a controlled substance . . . as defined
in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act” (CSA).
§§924(e)(1), (2)(A)(ii). The CSA, in turn, includes five schedules
of controlled substances and provides that these schedules must be
updated each year by the Attorney General.84Stat.1245,1247,21
U. S. C. §§811, 812.

															The two cases now before us present the question whether a state
crime constitutes a “serious drug offense” if it involved a drug
that was on the federal schedules when the defendant possessed or
trafficked in it but was later removed. We hold that such an
offense qualifies.

															I

															A

															In 2016, Justin Rashaad Brown sold cocaine to police officers in
a series of controlled buys. The officers conducted two
warrant-authorized searches of Brown’s home, where they discovered
cocaine and a loaded .38-caliber revolver. In 2018, a federal grand
jury returned an indictment charging Brown with several drug
offenses, as well as possession of a firearm by a convicted felon
in violation of18 U. S. C. §922(g)(1). Brown pleaded
guilty in 2019 and was sentenced two years later.

															At sentencing, the probation office recommended that Brown
receive ACCA’s mandatory minimum sentence because he had four prior
Pennsylvania convictions for possessing marijuana with intent to
distribute between 2009 and 2014, as well as one Pennsylvania
conviction for distributing cocaine in 2008. Brown disputed this
interpretation of ACCA and argued that his marijuana convictions
did not “involv[e] . . . a controlled substance
. . . as defined in [the CSA].” §924(e)(2)(A)(ii).

															A state drug offense counts as an ACCA predicate only if the
State’s definition of the drug in question “matche[s]” the
definition under federal law. Shular v. United
States,589 U.S. 154, 158 (2020). When Brown was convicted for
possessing marijuana, both federal and Pennsylvania law defined
marijuana to include “all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L.,”
so the definitions were a categorical match.21 U. S. C.
§802(16) (2006 ed.); Pa. Stat. Ann., Tit. 35, §780–102(b) (Purdon
Cum. Supp. 2012) (defining marijuana to include “all forms, species
and/or varieties of the genus Cannabis sativa L.”). But while
Brown’s federal charge was pending, Congress enacted the
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, which exempted some hemp, a
variety of Cannabis sativa L., from the federal definition of
marijuana. Pub. L. 115–334, §12619(a)(2),132Stat.5018.[1] Because the federal and state definitions did not
fully match when Brown was sentenced, he argued that his marijuana
convictions no longer qualified as “serious drug offense[s].”

															The District Court disagreed and sentenced him under ACCA, and
the Third Circuit affirmed. It concluded that the 2018 amendment
did not apply retroactively to federal offenses committed before
its effective date. Under the Third Circuit’s view, Brown was
“properly subject to . . . ACCA’s enhanced penalties”
because he violated §922(g) when the federal and state definitions
of marijuana were a categorical match. 47 F. 4th 147, 153, 155
(2022).

															B

															In 2017, Eugene Jackson noticed a police car arriving at the
Sparkle Food Market to execute an unrelated search warrant, and he
responded by fleeing and discarding a loaded .45-caliber pistol.
Officers eventually identified Jackson as the gun’s owner, and in
2019, he was charged with possession of a firearm by a convicted
felon. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced in 2021.

															Jackson’s presentence report identified several prior Florida
convictions as ACCA predicates, including convictions in 1998 and
2004 for possession and distribution of cocaine. But Jackson, like
Brown, claimed that these convictions were not for “serious drug
offense[s].” When those crimes were committed, the Federal
Government and Florida defined cocaine the same way.21
U. S. C. §812(c), Schedule II, (a)(4); Fla. Stat.
§§893.03(2)(a)(4), 893.13(1) (1998). But in 2015, the Federal
Government legalized a radioactive cocaine derivative called
[123I]ioflupane that is the active pharmaceutical ingredient in a
drug used to diagnose patients who are suspected to have
Parkinson’s disease. See Schedules of Controlled Substances:
Removal of [123I]Ioflupane From Schedule II of the Controlled
Substances Act, 80 Fed. Reg. 54717. So when Jackson committed his
federal offense, the federal and Florida definitions were no longer
a categorical match.

															The District Court found that Jackson’s prior convictions
qualified as serious drug offenses and sentenced him to ACCA’s
mandatory minimum. On appeal, the Eleventh Circuit initially
disagreed and vacated Jackson’s sentence. 36 F. 4th 1294, 1306
(2022). But a few months later, the panel sua sponte
vacated its opinion, ordered supplemental briefing, and in a new
opinion affirmed the District Court. 55 F. 4th 846, 862
(2022). The Eleventh Circuit reasoned that a prior drug conviction
is an ACCA predicate if the state and federal definitions of the
drug matched when the defendant committed the state offense.
Id., at 854.

															We granted Brown’s and Jackson’s petitions for a writ of
certiorari and consolidated the two cases. 598 U. S. ___
(2023). We now affirm.

															II

															A

															These cases ask what18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2) means when
it refers to a prior state drug offense “involving . . .
a controlled substance . . . as defined in section 102 of
the [CSA],” and specifically, whether the federal and state
definitions of a drug must match when the state crime is committed
or at some later point in time. The parties propose three different
answers.

															The Government argues that a prior state drug conviction
qualifies if the federal and state definitions of the relevant drug
matched when the defendant committed the state crime. Therefore,
even if the federal and state definitions are different when a
defendant violates the federal felon-in-possession law or is
sentenced under that law, earlier state convictions that occurred
during the period when the federal and state definitions were the
same nevertheless qualify as “serious drug offense[s].”

															Jackson, by contrast, argues that the federal and state
definitions must match when the defendant violates the federal
felon-in-possession statute. In his view, it does not matter
whether the federal and state laws both criminalized the relevant
drug when a defendant possessed or trafficked in it. If the Federal
Government later narrows its definition of that drug, no state
conviction under the broader definition counts against a defendant
who later commits the federal firearm offense.

															This interpretation would mean that Jackson’s two cocaine
convictions are no longer “serious drug offense[s]” because, years
later, the Federal Government narrowed the definition of cocaine in
the federal schedules to legalize a Parkinson’s drug derived from
cocaine. In fact, under Jackson’s and the dissent’s interpretation,
no Florida cocaine convictions obtained before July 1, 2017,
when Florida also legalized the derivative, would count. See 2017
Fla. Laws ch. 2017–110. That would be true even for convictions
involving the possession or distribution of huge shipments of
cocaine base.[2] And as other courts have noted,
cocaine convictions under the laws of many other States would
likewise be affected. See, e.g., United States
v. Perez, 46 F. 4th 691, 698–701 (CA8 2022) (excluding
an Iowa conviction under Jackson’s theory); United States v.
Myrick, 2023 WL 2351693, *2 (ED Pa., Mar. 2, 2023)
(excluding a Pennsylvania conviction).

															These cocaine convictions would be excluded even though it is
highly unlikely that any were based on the possession or sale of
the Parkinson’s drug. That derivative is radioactive, so it can be
produced only through a “highly technical and complex synthetic
route,” and the drug in which it appears can be stored for no more
than 24 hours. Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Admin., Office of
Diversion Control, Schedule of Controlled Substances: Removal of
[123I]Ioflupane From Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act:
Background, Data, and Analysis 5–6 (2015). Furthermore, anyone
attempting to become intoxicated by using the drug would need to
inject “nearly 6,000 vials,” or “15 liters of fluid, a volume
likely to cause death if administered intravenously.” Id.,
at 2. Unsurprisingly, the Federal Government has identified “no
case reports” involving individuals who misused that drug, or any
other [123I]ioflupane-containing product. Id., at 6.

															Brown offers a third option. He contends that the federal and
state definitions must match when the defendant is sentenced
for the federal firearm offense. Under his interpretation, it does
not matter whether the two definitions matched when a defendant
previously violated state law or even when he or she committed the
federal firearm offense. As he sees it, if the federal authorities
narrow the definition of a drug at any point before sentencing, the
prior state convictions no longer count as ACCA predicates.

															This interpretation would produce strange results in cases
involving long criminal investigations or prosecutions. In this
case, for example, Congress adopted the partial exemption of hemp
nearly nine months after Brown was indicted, and more than two
years after he violated §922(g). Under his proposed interpretation,
he is exempt from ACCA’s mandatory minimum only because his
prosecution did not move more quickly.

															Indeed, Brown’s interpretation could result in very different
sentences for co-defendants who committed the same state marijuana
offense on the same days and likewise committed the
felon-in-possession offense at the same time. But see18
U. S. C. §3553(a)(6) (instructing sentencing courts to
“avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with
similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct”).
Under Brown’s interpretation, if one co-defendant was sentenced on
December 19, 2018, one day before the Agriculture Improvement Act
was signed into law, and the other was sentenced on December 21,
the day after enactment, ACCA’s 15-year mandatory minimum would
apply to the first but not the second.

															B

															We must decide which of these three proposed interpretations is
correct. Standing alone, the operative phrase “involving
. . . a controlled substance (as defined in [the CSA])”
does not definitively answer that question, but precedent and
statutory context show that the Government’s interpretation is
correct.

															ACCA is a recidivist statute that gauges what a defendant’s
“history of criminal activity” says about his or her “culpability
and dangerousness.” McNeill v. United
States,563
U.S. 816, 823 (2011). It does this through a “backward-looking”
examination, id., at 820, of “previous convictions” that
bear on dangerousness, §924(e)(1). Thus, as we explained in
McNeill, ACCA requires sentencing courts to examine the law
as it was when the defendant violated it, even if that law is
subsequently amended. Id., at 820–822 (listing cases
examining the law at the time of the predicate offense).

															In McNeill, the question was whether a prior state drug
conviction was for a crime that carried the maximum penalty needed
to qualify as a “serious drug offense,” i.e., imprisonment
for 10 years or more. To answer that question, we looked back to
“the law under which the defendant was convicted” and concluded
that a subsequent statutory amendment reducing the maximum penalty
below the 10-year threshold did not matter. Id., at 820.
This “backward-looking” approach supports the Government’s
interpretation here.

															The plain language of18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(A)(i), the
provision that immediately precedes the provision at issue here,
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii), points to the same conclusion. Section
924(e)(2)(A)(i) defines a “serious drug offense” to include certain
federal drug crimes, namely, “offense[s] under the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U. S. C. §801 et seq.)” or
two other federal laws. (Emphasis added.) Any crime contained in
the CSA is an offense “under the [CSA].” The standard “Judgment in
a Criminal Case” used in federal courts indicates whether a
defendant was convicted and sentenced for such an offense,[3] and a later change in a federal drug schedule cannot
change that fact. The Government’s interpretation would treat state
offenses “involving . . . a controlled substance (as
defined in [the CSA])” like those federal offenses “under the
[CSA].” §924(e)(2).

															Petitioners’ interpretations, by contrast, would treat those
federal and state offenses differently. Consider a defendant who
was caught distributing cocaine on back-to-back days, was charged
with a federal crime for the first day’s offense and an identical
state crime for the second, and was convicted of both before the
2015 amendment that deleted the Parkinson’s drug from the
definition of cocaine. Under petitioners’ interpretations, the
federal offense would remain an ACCA predicate, but the state
offense would not, even though the crimes and the statutes of
conviction were otherwise identical.

															That is a very strange reading of §§924(e)(2)(A)(i) and (ii).
Both subsections refer to prior offenses relating to the CSA, and
in §924(e)(2)(i) Congress clearly indicated that past conduct that
violated the CSA is probative of a defendant’s “culpability and
dangerousness,” McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823, even if the
federal drug schedule is later amended. There is no reason to think
Congress reached a different judgment as to petitioners’ conduct
merely because they had been convicted under a state, rather than
federal, statute. Indeed, it would be unnatural to give
back-to-back references to the CSA starkly different
interpretations. See, e.g., Brown v.
Gardner,513 U.S.
115, 118 (1994); Ratzlaf v. United
States,510 U.S.
135, 143 (1994).[4]

															C

															The Government’s interpretation also best fulfills ACCA’s
statutory objectives. Congress’s “general approach” in ACCA was to
single out “offenses of a certain level of seriousness that involve
violence or an inherent risk thereof, and that are likely to be
committed by career offenders.” Taylor v. United
States,495 U.S.
575, 590 (1990). Because defendants who have repeatedly
committed ACCA predicate offenses are “especially likely to inflict
grave harm when in possession of a firearm,” ACCA imposes a higher
punishment when they do so. Wooden v. United
States,595 U.S. 360, 375 (2022); United States v.
Rodriquez,553 U.S.
377, 385 (2008) (“[A] second or subsequent offense is often
regarded as more serious because it portends greater future danger
and therefore warrants an increased sentence for purposes of
deterrence and incapacitation”). A defendant’s “history of criminal
activity” does not “cease to exist” merely because the crime was
later redefined. McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823. It
therefore makes sense to ask, as the Government does, whether a
prior offense met ACCA’s definition of seriousness—and thus
suggested future danger—at the time it was committed.

															Petitioners and the dissent disagree. As Brown puts it, when the
Federal Government “changes the federal drug schedules,” it
“necessarily conclude[s]” that the de-scheduled substance “does not
implicate the culpability or harm that federal law previously
attributed to it.” Reply Brief for Petitioner Brown 1 (emphasis
deleted). Of course, Brown and Jackson were themselves convicted of
crimes involving substances that are still on the federal
schedules, marijuana and cocaine, not hemp or
[123I]ioflupane.[5] But even setting that aside,
their argument misunderstands the theory on which ACCA is
based.

															A prior drug conviction for an offense punishable by 10 years’
imprisonment augurs a risk of future dangerousness even if the drug
is no longer considered dangerous. That is because the conviction
reveals that the defendant previously engaged in illegal conduct
that created a dangerous risk of violence, either with law
enforcement or with others operating in the same illegal field. If
left at large, such defendants present a serious risk to public
safety.

															That risk “does not cease to exist” if the law under which the
defendant was convicted is later amended or eliminated.
McNeill, 563 U. S., at 823. For example, consider a
person who distributed alcohol during Prohibition. The later
legalization of alcohol did not by any means ensure that these
bootleggers would take up legitimate jobs. Instead, after the end
of Prohibition, many of them simply shifted to other illegal
enterprises. See S. Morison, The Oxford History of the American
People 901 (1965) (Prohibition led to “the building up of a
criminal class that turned to gambling and drugs” after the
Eighteenth Amendment was repealed). Likewise, Brown’s and Jackson’s
multiple convictions for serious drug crimes are evidence that they
may continue to “ ‘commit a large number of fairly serious
crimes as their means of livelihood’ ” in the future.
Wooden, 595 U. S., at 375 (quoting Taylor, 495
U. S., at 587). And that risk remains true despite the
technical changes to the federal drug schedules on which their
arguments hang.

															For this reason, the Court has previously rejected similar
arguments about ACCA’s rationale. Like petitioners here, the
petitioner in McNeill argued that a later reduction in the
maximum sentence for his offense reflected a legislative judgment
that his prior offense was less serious than previously thought.
Brief for Petitioner in No. 10–5258 (CA4), pp. 15, 35. And
this, he suggested, meant that the offense should no longer be
treated as “serious” under ACCA. We termed that argument “absurd.”
McNeill, 563 U. S., at 822. The “subsequent chang[e] in
state law” did not “erase [the] earlier conviction.” Id., at
823. And it was the fact of that earlier conviction—not the
legislature’s subsequent judgment—that ACCA was concerned with,
because that fact “demonstrate[d]” the defendant’s “culpability and
dangerousness.” Ibid.

															III

															Petitioners and the dissent make various other arguments, but
none is persuasive.

															A

															1

															Jackson mainly relies on two interpretive tools. He begins with
the so-called reference canon. Brief for Petitioner Jackson 31.
This canon, he claims, means that ACCA “incorporates [the]
schedules . . . ‘as [they] exis[t] whenever a question
under [ACCA] arises.’ ” Id., at 32 (quoting Jam
v. International Finance Corp.,586 U.S. 199, 209 (2019)).
“And,” he says, “the first time a ‘question arises’ under ACCA is
when a person commits [a] federal firearm offense.” Brief for
Petitioner Jackson 32.

															The reference canon can be a helpful tool, but Jackson misuses
it. That canon provides that a statutory reference to a
“general subject” incorporates “the law on that subject as
it exists whenever a question under the statute arises.”
Jam, 586 U. S., at 209 (emphasis added). But a
reference “to another statute by specific title or section
number”—such as ACCA’s reference to21 U. S. C. §802—“in
effect cuts and pastes the referenced statute as it existed when
the referring statute was enacted, without any subsequent
amendments.” 586 U. S., at 209–210 (emphasis added).
That part of the reference canon undermines Jackson’s
position.

															Jackson attempts to rescue his argument by asserting that ACCA’s
mention of the CSA is actually a “general reference.” Reply Brief
for Petitioner Jackson 15. To support this argument, he cites cases
that treat statutes as adopting “the general law on [a] subject,”
even though the statutes “referred to” that general law “in terms
of the sections of the statutes in which it is to be found.”
George Williams College v. Williams Bay, 242 Wis.
311, 316, 317, 7 N.W.2d 891, 894 (1943). But even if we assume that
there may be contexts in which references to specific statutory
provisions may be considered “general,” see, e.g., Matter
of Commitment of Edward S., 118 N. J. 118, 134, n. 9,

570 A.2d 917, 925, n. 9 (1990), it is hard to see the
phrase “as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act”
as anything but a specific reference.18 U. S. C.
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii).

															And for reasons already set out, the “context” here does not
help Jackson. As we have explained, his reading would treat a state
offense involving a “controlled substance . . . defined
in [the CSA]” differently from a federal offense “under the [CSA],”
even though both phrases make reference to the same Act.
Supra, at 8–9. That approach would give defendants with
prior state offenses the benefit of subsequent amendments to the
CSA but would ignore those same amendments for prior federal
offenses. In that context, Jackson’s reliance on the reference
canon is clearly unpersuasive.

															Alternatively, Jackson says that his reading is required by the
“settled legal principle” that “the law that sets the penalty for a
federal crime is the law in place when the crime was committed.”
Brief for Petitioner Jackson 17 (citing Dorsey v. United
States,567 U.S.
260, 272–273 (2012)). And to show that this principle supports
his reading of §924(e)(2)(A)(ii), he offers a series of
hypotheticals involving amendments to ACCA. Brief for Petitioner
Jackson 18–20. Here is one. If Congress deleted drug possession
from the list of “serious drug offense[s],” he argues, no one would
think that someone who “commit[ted] a federal firearm offense after
this change . . . would be subject to ACCA based on a
prior state conviction” for drug possession. Id., at 18.
Therefore, he maintains, the same should be true for amendments to
the schedules.

															This argument begs the question that these cases present, which
is whether §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) is amended with every change in the
drug schedules. Jackson imagines a version of ACCA that plainly
would not apply to a prior state offense because that version would
no longer list drug possession as a “serious” offense, and he then
reasons that the same result should obtain here. But in his
hypothetical, §924(e) was amended. Here, only the federal drug
schedules were changed. Jackson’s argument that a change in the
federal drug schedules equates to a change in §924(e)(2)(A)(ii) is
thus nothing more than his reference-canon argument dressed in
different garb. And for the reasons we have explained, we are
convinced that the canon does not work in the way he suggests.

															In all events, Jackson’s emphasis on “the law in place when the
crime was committed” is a red herring. Section 924(e)(2)(A)(ii)
currently means that a prior state drug conviction may constitute
an ACCA predicate if the drugs on the federal and state schedules
matched when the state drug offense was committed. Thus, contrary
to Jackson’s suggestion, treating his prior convictions as ACCA
predicates is entirely consistent with the “settled legal
principle” that current law “sets the penalty for a federal crime.”
Id., at 17.

															2

															The dissent agrees with Jackson’s interpretation but for a
different reason. It believes that all cross-references
“plug [in] the referenced provision” as it exists “at the time of
the statute’s interpretation.” Post, at 4–5 (opinion of
Jackson, J.). Thus, ACCA’s reference to the CSA must incorporate
“the federal drug schedules that are currently in effect for
sentencing purposes—i.e., those that were effective
at the time of the federal offense.” Post, at 4.

															The problem for the dissent is that none of the cases it cites
supports this proposition. See Yellen v. Confederated
Tribes of Chehalis Reservation,594 U.S. 338, 344–348 (2021);
Astrue v. Capato,566 U.S.
541, 547–549 (2012); Carachuri-Rosendo v.
Holder,560 U.S.
563, 566–570 (2010); Holder v. Humanitarian Law
Project,561 U.S.
1, 8–9 (2010). For good reason: as we have explained,
cross-references sometimes refer to the law as it currently exists,
but they may also incorporate a referenced statute as it existed
when the cross-reference was enacted. Supra, at 12. Indeed,
many of the dissent’s cases stand for the unobjectionable
proposition that courts must carefully consider the text and
context of each statute before adopting a one-size-fits-all
approach to cross-references. See Herrmann v. Cencom
Cable Assoc., Inc., 978 F.2d 978, 983 (CA7 1992) (attempting to
“do the least damage” to unravel “contradictory enactments”);
United States v. Head, 552 F.3d 640, 645 (CA7 2009)
(rejecting a “categorical rule” for “statutory cross-references”);
United States v. Ho, 984 F.3d 191, 202 (CA2 2020)
(rejecting a reference-canon argument inconsistent with plain
language).

															Following the approach laid out by the dissent’s cases thus
brings us back to the question with which we started: What is the
best reading of ACCA’s cross-reference in light of context,
precedent, and statutory purpose? Supra, at 7. For the
reasons we have explained, it is that a prior state drug conviction
constitutes an ACCA predicate if the drugs on the federal and state
schedules matched when the state drug offense was committed.

															B

															We turn next to Brown’s interpretation, which would require the
state and federal definitions to match when the defendant is
sentenced for a federal firearm offense. Brown first argues that
his interpretation is grounded in ACCA’s text because it focuses on
the “here-and-now import” of “historical facts.” Brief for
Petitioner Brown 8. Specifically, Brown notes that ACCA uses the
“present participle of ‘involve,’ ” rather than “the
past participle.” Reply Brief for Petitioner Brown 2–3. And he
suggests that the phrase “ ‘as defined in’ ” is likewise
in the present tense. Id., at 3.

															Unfortunately for Brown, we have already rejected this textual
argument.[6] The petitioner in McNeill
likewise argued that the present-tense language in ACCA’s
definition of a “serious drug offense” indicated a present-day
focus. 563 U. S., at 820. Citing that language, he asked the
Court to require federal courts to “loo[k] to the state law in
effect at the time of the federal sentencing,” ibid., but we
declined to do so. Because “ACCA is concerned with convictions that
have already occurred,” we held that it requires a historical
inquiry into the state law at the time of that prior offense.
Ibid. And the “[u]se of the present tense . . .
d[id] not suggest otherwise.” Ibid.
McNeill’s conclusion makes sense. Use of the present
tense, as opposed to the past, was likely a stylistic rather than a
substantive choice. Around the time of ACCA’s enactment,
legislative drafters were instructed, “[w]henever possible,” to
“use the present tense (rather than the past or future).” House
Office of the Legislative Counsel, Style Manual; Drafting
Suggestions for the Trained Drafter §102(c), p. 2 (1989); see
also D. Hirsch, Drafting Federal Law §5.6, p. 45 (2d ed. 1989)
(“Various commentators on drafting have tried, over the years, to
persuade drafters to use the present tense . . . ”). So,
at least in the instant context, we cannot place too much weight on
the use of the present tense as opposed to the past.

															Brown also claims that his reading is required by United
States v. Schooner Peggy, 1 Cranch 103 (1801), which
says that when the law changes while a case is in progress, the
case must be decided under the new law.[7]
Id., at 110. But that principle does nothing to advance
Brown’s position. Section 924(e)(2)(A)(ii) has not changed at any
point in the litigation, from the time petitioners committed their
federal offenses until today. Then, as now, under §924 past state
drug possession offenses may qualify as ACCA predicates if the
federal and state schedules matched when the state crimes
occurred.

															C

															We conclude by addressing some additional arguments advanced by
both petitioners. First, they assert that our interpretation should
be rejected because it is underinclusive—specifically, because it
would preclude ACCA enhancements for state offenses involving drugs
added to the federal lists only after the state crimes were
committed. But none of the parties’ interpretations captures all
cases involving career criminals. Indeed, Brown and Jackson are
themselves asking to be exempted from ACCA’s reach even though they
both have a history of dealing drugs that remain prohibited by
federal law.

															Second, petitioners suggest that the Government’s interpretation
is absurd because it “would exclude from ACCA’s reach all state
drug convictions from before 1970” when the CSA was enacted. Brief
for Petitioner Jackson 33; accord, Brief for Petitioner Brown 16.
But whether or not this consequence is desirable, it is not
absurd.

															We can easily see a reason why Congress might have chosen not to
count either federal or state drug convictions that occurred before
1970. Before that time, “Congress ha[d] enacted more than 50 pieces
of legislation relating to . . . dangerous drugs,” and
this had “given rise to a confusing and often duplicative approach
to . . . enforcement.” H. R. Rep. No. 91–1444, pt.
1, p. 6 (1970). The CSA was designed to replace these
scattered provisions “with a single comprehensive statute.” Cong.
Research Serv., L. Sacco, Drug Enforcement in the United States:
History, Policy, and Trends 5 (2014). It was reasonable for
Congress to peg ACCA’s penalties to that new comprehensive
regulatory scheme rather than requiring courts to grapple with the
welter of federal drug laws that previously existed.

															Petitioners argue that the Government’s interpretation would
unduly burden courts and defendants by requiring them to undertake
the laborious task of digging up old federal drug schedules and
comparing those to the state laws the defendants violated. But the
difficulty of this task is overstated. Most drug convictions
concern just a few drugs, and the federal and state definitions of
those drugs do not often change. In the cases now before us, the
courts below had no apparent difficulty finding the needed
information.

															Finally, both petitioners contend that the rule of lenity
counsels us to adopt their interpretations. It does not. Lenity
applies only if a statute remains grievously ambiguous after we
have consulted “ ‘everything from which aid can be
derived.’ ” Pugin v. Garland,599 U.S. 600, 610
(2023) (quoting Ocasio v. United States,578 U.S. 282,
295, n. 8 (2016)). As we have explained, however, context,
precedent, and statutory design adequately show “ ‘what
Congress intended.’ ” United States v.
Castleman,572 U.S.
157, 173 (2014) (quoting Barber v.
Thomas,560 U.S.
474, 488 (2010)).

															In any event, neither Jackson’s nor Brown’s interpretation would
be preferable for all defendants. Both interpretations could hurt
defendants who committed or were sentenced for the
felon-in-possession offense before the addition of a drug to the
federal schedules. As petitioners’ own briefs highlight, States
sometimes criminalize drugs before the Federal Government does so.
See Brief for Petitioner Jackson 34–35; Brief for Petitioner Brown
17. For instance, Florida banned the stimulant known as bath salts
10 months earlier than the Federal Government.[8]
And Utah criminalized the hallucinogen methoxetamine nearly a
decade before the Federal Government followed suit. See 2013 Utah
Laws ch. 88; Schedules of Controlled Substances: Placement of
Methoxetamine (MXE) in Schedule I, 87 Fed. Reg. 34166 (2022). State
convictions for those drugs that predate the federal amendments
would not count as ACCA predicates under the Government’s
interpretation but may under petitioners’ interpretations. It would
be odd to use the rule of lenity to help petitioners but harm
others.

															*  *  *

															For these reasons, we hold that a state drug conviction counts
as an ACCA predicate if it involved a drug on the federal schedules
at the time of that offense. Accordingly, we affirm the judgments
of the Courts of Appeals.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1  Hemp is exempted if it contains less
than 0.3% THC (tetrahydrocannabinol), the main psychoactive
constituent of cannabis. See7 U. S. C. §1639o;21
U. S. C. §802(16).
2  See, e.g., E. Johnson,
A Sarasota Drug Sting Brings Results 10 Arrests, and a
Million-Dollar Supply of Cocaine Taken Off, Sarasota Herald-Tribune
(Feb. 4, 2014),
https://www.heraldtribune.com/story/news/2014/02/05/a-sarasota-drug-sting-brings-results-10-arrests-and-a-million-dollar-supply-of-cocaine-taken-off/29227445007;
see also Verdict in State v. Gomez, No.
2014CF001404–004NC (12th Jud. C. C. Sarasota Cty., Fla., May
1, 2014).
3  See
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/ao245b.pdf.
4  Jackson argues that reading18
U. S. C. §924(e)(2) to refer to the past would be
inconsistent with other statutory references to the CSA that “must
incorporate the CSA schedules at the time of the federal offense.”
Brief for Petitioner Jackson 14. For example, he points to
§924(g)(3), which criminalizes cross-border travel to obtain a
firearm intended for use in a state offense “relating to any
controlled substance (as defined in [the CSA]),” and §342, which
prohibits the operator of a common carrier from operating under the
influence of “any controlled substance (as defined in [the CSA]).”
But those statutes focus entirely on present-day conduct, while
ACCA refers to “previous convictions.” §924(e)(1). Because ACCA is
concerned with recidivism, it is not inconsistent to read it
differently.
5  Latching onto this sentence, the
dissent spends three pages accusing us of departing from the
categorical approach. Post, at 11–14 (opinion of Jackson,
J.). The dissent attacks a strawman. We agree that our precedents
require us to ask whether a defendant’s prior conviction matches
ACCA’s requirements. Post, at 11–12. The question here is
what ACCA requires.
6  The dissent makes a similar textual
argument but does not grapple with our reasoning in McNeill
v. United States,563 U.S.
816 (2011). See post, at 6, and n. 2.
7  Brown also likens his interpretation
to the “ordinary practice” of applying Guidelines sentencing
enhancements as they exist at sentencing. Tr. of Oral Arg. 4. But
there is reason to doubt that the Guidelines practice is relevant
here. That is because Congress has expressly directed courts to
apply the Guidelines “in effect on the date the defendant is
sentenced.”18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii). ACCA contains
no similar instruction.
8  Florida Bans ‘Bath Salt’ Drugs After
Violent Outbursts, Sun Sentinel (Jan. 27, 2011),
https://www.sun-sentinel.com/2011/01/27/florida-bans-bath-salt-drugs-after-violent-outbursts;
Press Release, Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Admin., Chemicals
Used in “Bath Salts” Now Under Federal Control and Regulation (Oct.
21, 2011),
https://www.dea.gov/press-releases/2011/10/21/chemicals-used-bath-salts-now-under-federal-control-and-regulation.


