::decision_cite:: 22-674
::decision_name::  Campos-Chaves v. Garland
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 22–674 and 22–884

															_________________

															MORIS ESMELIS CAMPOS-CHAVES,
PETITIONER

															22–674v.

															MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY
GENERAL

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															

															MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL,
PETITIONER

															22–884v.

															VARINDER SINGH

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 14, 2024]

															Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															When the Government seeks to remove an alien, it
is required to notify the alien of the time and place of the
removal hearings. Title 8 U. S. C. §1229(a) describes two
types of notice—an initial notice to appear under paragraph (1),
and, “in the case of any change or postponement in the time and
place of ” the removal proceedings, a notice of hearing under
paragraph (2). When an alien fails to appear at his removal hearing
despite receiving such notice, he “shall be ordered removed in
absentia” if the Government can make certain showings.
§1229a(b)(5)(A). The alien can seek to have that order rescinded,
however, if the alien can demonstrate that he “did not receive
notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of [§1229(a)].”

															We granted certiorari in these cases to consider
what it means to “demonstrat[e] that the alien did not receive
notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).” §1229a(b)
(5)(C)(ii); 600 U. S. ___ (2023). Each of the aliens in these
cases argues that he may seek rescission because he did not receive
a notice to appear that complies with paragraph (1). We hold that,
to rescind an in absentia removal order on the ground that the
alien “did not receive notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or
(2),” the alien must show that he did not receive notice under
either paragraph for the hearing at which the alien was absent and
ordered removed. Because each of the aliens in these cases received
a proper paragraph (2) notice for the hearings they missed and at
which they were ordered removed, they cannot seek rescission of
their in absentia removal orders on the basis of defective notice
under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).

															I

															A

															The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA),
66Stat. 163, as amended, 8 U. S. C. §1101
et seq., sets out “how persons are admitted to, and
removed from, the United States.” Pereida v.
Wilkinson, 592 U.S. 224, 227 (2021). An alien is removable
if he is either “inadmissible” under §1182 or “deportable” under
§1227. 8 U. S. C. §1229a(e)(2). When the Federal
Government decides to place an alien in removal proceedings, the
INA requires that the alien be provided with “written notice.”
§§1229(a)(1), (2).

															That “written notice” can take one of two forms.
First, under paragraph (1) of §1229(a), the alien “shall be given”
a “ ‘notice to appear,’ ” or NTA. The NTA must set out,
among other things, “[t]he nature of the proceedings against the
alien,” “[t]he legal authority under which the proceedings are
conducted,” “[t]he time and place at which the proceedings will be
held,” and the consequences of failing to appear.
§1229(a)(1). In Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593

															

															U. S. 155 (2021), we held that this
information must be provided in a single document in order to
satisfy §1229(a)(1). Id., at 160–162. Second, under
paragraph (2), “in the case of any change or postponement in the
time and place of such proceedings,” the agency must provide “a
written notice” specifying “the new time or place of the
proceedings” and “the consequences” of failing to attend.
§1229(a)(2).

															Aliens who receive such written notice are
expected to attend their hearings. Section 1229a(b)(5)(A) provides
the consequences for aliens who, “after written notice required
under paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a) of this title has
been provided,” fail to attend “a proceeding under this section.”
Such aliens “shall be ordered removed in absentia” if the
Government “establishes by clear, unequivocal, and convincing
evidence that the written notice was so provided and that the alien
is removable.” §1229a(b)(5)(A).

															There are three scenarios in which an in
absentia removal order may be rescinded. First, the alien can file
a motion to reopen within 180 days of the order, and must
demonstrate that the failure to appear was because of “exceptional
circumstances.” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). Second, an alien can seek to
rescind his in absentia removal order if he “demonstrates that the
alien was in Federal or State custody and the failure to appear was
through no fault of the alien.” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). Third, there
is the scenario implicated by these cases: an alien can seek
rescission if he “demonstrates that the alien did not receive
notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” of §1229(a).
Ibid.

															B

															We consolidated three cases brought by aliens
who moved for rescission on the ground that they did not receive
proper notice. Though the facts vary, the key details are the same
in each case. The Government failed to provide a single-document
NTA, but eventually provided each alien with a notice specifying
the time and place of the removal hearing. When each alien failed
to show up for the hearing, an Immigration Judge entered an in
absentia order of removal. Each alien then sought rescission of
that order under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). In all three cases, an
Immigration Judge and the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)
refused to reopen the proceedings, prompting the aliens to file a
petition for review in federal court. The Fifth Circuit considered
and denied one of these petitions, but the Ninth Circuit granted
the other two.

															1

															Moris Esmelis Campos-Chaves is the petitioner
from the Fifth Circuit. He is a native and citizen of El Salvador,
and he entered the United States in 2005 without inspection near
Laredo, Texas. Three days later, the Government initiated removal
proceedings by serving an NTA, charging that he was removable under
§1182(a)(6)(A)(i). The NTA provided the address of the immigration
court, but told Campos-Chaves to appear on “a date to be set” and
at “a time to be set.” App. 54. The Government followed up a few
months later, sending Campos-Chaves a notice of hearing that set
the hearing date to be September 20, 2005, at 9 a.m.

															Campos-Chaves never appeared. The Immigration
Judge noted his absence and the lack of any explanation for it.
Upon finding that “clear, convincing, and unequivocal” evidence
established Campos-Chaves’s removability, the Immigration Judge
ordered him removed in absentia. App. to Pet. for Cert. in No.
22–674, p. 16a.

															Thirteen years later, Campos-Chaves filed a
motion to reopen his removal proceedings on the theory that he
never received a proper NTA. He relied on our decision in
Pereira v. Sessions, 585 U.S. 198 (2018), in which we
held that “[a] putative notice to appear that fails to designate
the specific time or place” of the removal proceedings “is not a
‘notice to appear under section 1229(a).’ ” Id., at
208–209 (quoting 8 U. S. C. §1229b(d)(1)). The
Immigration Judge denied Campos-Chaves’s motion, and the BIA
dismissed his subsequent appeal. The BIA relied on prior precedent
in which it had held that an in absentia order of removal may not
be rescinded merely because the NTA lacked time and place
information “so long as a subsequent [notice of hearing] specifying
that information was properly sent to the alien.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. in No. 22–674, at 8a.

															Campos-Chaves filed a petition for review in the
Fifth Circuit. After withdrawing and amending one opinion, the
Fifth Circuit denied his petition, relying on the fact that
Campos-Chaves “d[id] not dispute that he . . . received
the subsequent [notice].” 54 F. 4th 314, 315 (2022).

															2

															Varinder Singh is one of the two respondents
from the Ninth Circuit. He is a native and citizen of India who
entered the United States in 2016 by climbing over a fence near
Calexico, California. Several weeks later, the Government served an
NTA that charged Singh as removable under §1182(a)(6)(A)(i) and
indicated that the date and time of the hearing was “TBD.” App. 11.
Five days later, the Government sent a notice of hearing to Singh’s
given address that provided a specific time and date. About two
years later, in October 2018, the immigration court sent a new
notice of hearing to Singh’s address, rescheduling the hearing for
November 26, 2018, at 1 p.m.

															When that date arrived, Singh failed to appear.
Because the Government did not have his file, however, the
immigration court rescheduled the hearing for December 12, 2018, at
9 a.m., again sending a notice to Singh’s address. Singh failed to
appear at that hearing as well. The Immigration Judge determined
that Singh was removable, and accordingly entered an in absentia
order of removal.

															In April 2019, Singh sought to rescind his
removal order. Like Campos-Chaves, Singh argued that rescission was
warranted because he did not receive a proper NTA under
Pereira. The Immigration Judge and the BIA disagreed, so
Singh petitioned for review by the Ninth Circuit.

															The Ninth Circuit granted his petition. 24
F. 4th 1315, 1317 (2022). The panel held that the lack of a
single-document NTA alone rendered Singh’s in absentia removal
order rescindable. Id., at 1319–1320. The Government’s
petition for rehearing en banc was denied. 51 F. 4th 371
(2022). Judge Collins, joined by 11 other judges, dissented.
Id., at 371–382.

															3

															Raul Daniel Mendez-Colín, a native and citizen
of Mexico, is the other respondent from the Ninth Circuit. He
attempted to enter the United States in 2001 at San Luis, Arizona,
with two other aliens, falsely claiming that he was a United States
citizen. The next day, he was served an NTA, which charged him with
removability under §1182(a)(6)(E)(i). The NTA included the
immigration court’s address, but provided only that the date and
time were “[t]o be set.” App. 46.

															Soon thereafter, the immigration court mailed
Mendez-Colín a notice of hearing, with a specific date and time for
a hearing later that year. Mendez-Colín appeared at that hearing.
The immigration court ultimately scheduled multiple additional
hearings to take place in 2002. For each, the Immigration Judge
provided a notice of hearing to either Mendez-Colín or his
attorney, who attended all of the 2002 hearings.

															The Immigration Judge sustained the charge of
removability at the last of those hearings. Mendez-Colín expressed
his desire to apply for cancellation of removal, prompting the
immigration court to mail a notice to his attorney for an
individual hearing on September 15, 2003, at 9 a.m.

															Days before the September 15 hearing,
Mendez-Colín’s attorney filed a motion to withdraw as counsel
because of his client’s “fail[ure] to maintain contact.” Record in
No. 20–71846 (CA9), ECF Doc. 9–2, p. 77. Nonetheless, the
attorney attended the September 15 hearing, where the Immigration
Judge granted the motion to withdraw but retained the attorney for
“the limited purpose of serv[ing any] in absentia order.”
Id., at 155. The Immigration Judge determined that
Mendez-Colín “abandoned any and all claim(s) for relief from
removal” and ordered him removed in absentia. Id., at
156.

															Mendez-Colín filed two motions to reopen his
removal proceedings in December 2003 and February 2004,
respectively. The Immigration Judge denied both. Mendez-Colín
appealed the denial of his second motion to reopen, but the BIA
considered the appeal withdrawn when he was removed from the United
States during its pendency.

															About 15 years later, Mendez-Colín moved to
reinstate his appeal, now claiming that his in absentia order of
removal was rescindable because of his defective NTA. The BIA
denied the motion, prompting Mendez-Colín to file a petition for
review, which was heard by the same Ninth Circuit panel that heard
Singh. 2022 WL 342959 (2022). The panel granted the petition
in an unpublished opinion, ibid., and the full court denied
the Government’s en banc petition alongside the en banc petition in
Singh. 50 F. 4th, at 942, 946 (2022).

															II

															We granted certiorari in all three cases to
decide whether an alien can seek rescission of an in absentia
removal order indefinitely whenever the Government fails to provide
a single-document NTA. The Government concedes that, in all three
cases, the NTAs lacked a specific time and date and thus failed to
comply with §1229(a)(1). And before this Court, each alien argues
that he is eligible for rescission under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). Thus,
this litigation turns on whether Campos-Chaves, Singh, and
Mendez-Colín can “demonstrat[e]” that they “did not receive notice
in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1229(a).”
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).

															The Government reads §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) to
permit rescission only when the alien did not receive notice of the
hearing he failed to attend. In each of these cases, the alien was
ordered removed in absentia at a hearing for which he received
notice. The Government argues that those notices of hearing
complied with paragraph (2), and that each alien thereby
“receive[d] notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of
section 1229(a).” Ibid. That, continues the Government,
means the aliens are ineligible for rescission of their in absentia
removal orders.

															Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín read the
statute differently and urge a distributive reading of the “or” in
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). That is, they distribute the phrase “did not
receive notice in accordance with” across “paragraph (1) or (2),”
such that an alien can have his in absentia removal order rescinded
if he “demonstrates” that he “did not receive notice in accordance
with” paragraph (1) or that he “did not receive notice in
accordance with” paragraph (2). Because each alien can
“demonstrat[e]” that he “did not receive” an NTA, they argue that
they each can seek rescission of their in absentia removal orders.
Brief for Respondent Singh 47.

															We agree with the Government. An alien can have
his in absentia removal order rescinded under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)
only if he can demonstrate that he “did not receive” a paragraph
(1) notice or a paragraph (2) notice—whichever corresponds
to the hearing at which he was ordered removed in absentia. Each
alien before us received paragraph (2) notices for the hearings
they missed. They are therefore ineligible for rescission of their
in absentia removal orders.

															A

															As always, we start with the text.
Bartenwerfer v. Buckley, 598 U.S. 69, 74 (2023). And
here, the text provides that to be eligible for rescission of his
in absentia removal order an alien must “demonstrat[e] that the
alien did not receive notice in accordance with paragraph (1) or
(2) of section 1229(a).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). The word
“ ‘or’ ” is “ ‘almost always disjunctive,’ ”
Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 584 U.S. 79, 87
(2018) (quoting United States v. Woods, 571 U.S.
31, 45 (2013)), and is generally used “to indicate
. . . an alternative,” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 1585 (1993); see also Woods, 571 U. S., at
45–46. So here, §1229a(b)(5)’s ordinary meaning is that either a
paragraph (1) notice or a paragraph (2) notice can count as “notice
in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).”

															Of course, “statutory context can overcome the
ordinary, disjunctive meaning of ‘or.’ ” Encino
Motorcars, 584 U. S., at 87; see also Pulsifer v.
United States, 601 U.S. 124, 151 (2024) (“[C]onjunctions are
versatile words, which can work differently depending on context”).
But statutory context points in the same direction as the usual
meaning here. Consider §1229a(b)(5)(A), just two subparagraphs
earlier, which sets out the preconditions for an alien to be
removed in absentia in the first place. That subparagraph
provides:

															“Any alien who, after written notice
required under paragraph (1) or (2) of [§1229(a)] has been provided
to the alien or the alien’s counsel of record, does not attend a
proceeding under this section, shall be ordered removed in absentia
if the Service establishes by clear, unequivocal, and convincing
evidence that the written notice was so provided and that the alien
is removable.”

															Just as in subparagraph (C), subparagraph (A)
refers to “paragraph (1) or (2)” notice. In subparagraph (A),
however, the “or” is unambiguously disjunctive; there is no way to
distribute language across the “or” that can provide an alternative
meaning of the statute. On any reading, subparagraph (A) does not
require both paragraphs (1) and (2) notice before an alien
can be removed in absentia. It requires only one.

															Furthermore, subparagraph (A) requires the
Government to establish that it provided “the written
notice.” §1229a(b)(5)(A) (emphasis added); see also ibid.
(“The written notice by the Attorney General shall be
considered sufficient for purposes of this subparagraph if provided
at the most recent address provided under section 1229(a)(1)(F)”
(emphasis added)). In Niz-Chavez, we concluded that the
phrase “ ‘the notice described in paragraph (1) or (2) of
section 1229(a)’ ” indicated that the notice must be provided
in one document. 593 U. S., at 166 (quoting §1229a(b)(7)); see
also id., at 165 (“[A]n article coupled with a singular noun
. . . suggest[s] a discrete document”). If “the notice”
denotes a single document, it certainly must denote a single
notice. And as long as the Government can show—under the given
burden of proof—that the alien is removable and was provided
“the written notice,” the alien “shall be ordered removed in
absentia.” §1229a(b)(5)(A) (emphasis added). Subparagraph (A)
clearly contemplates in absentia removal of aliens who received
only one notice under paragraph (1) or (2).

															Indeed, concluding otherwise would create a
mismatch in the statutory scheme. Under the aliens’ theory, it is
more difficult for the Government to defend an in absentia removal
order than it is to obtain one in the first place. An alien can be
removed in absentia on the basis of receiving one notice,
but the aliens would read §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) to permit rescission
of that order for failure to receive both types of notices.
Brief for Respondent Singh 22. We doubt that Congress intended such
an incongruity. See Dacostagomez-Aguilar v. United States
Atty. Gen., 40 F. 4th 1312, 1317 (CA11 2022) (“It would be
nonsensical to invalidate an in absentia removal order because two
kinds of notice were not received when only one was required in the
first place”).

															B

															Our conclusion that a single notice defeats
rescission under §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) does not end the analysis,
however. We still must determine which notice the alien must
show was lacking in order to have his in absentia removal order
rescinded. We hold that, in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii), “notice in
accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” refers to the notice for the
hearing the alien missed, and at which he was ordered removed.

															Section 1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) cross-references
paragraphs (1) and (2) of §1229(a). Paragraph (1) notice—the NTA—is
the initial document notifying the alien of “removal proceedings
under” §1229a. Paragraph (2) notice issues “in the case of any
change or postponement in the time and place of such proceedings”
and provides the “new time or place of the proceedings.” Thus,
notice under paragraph (2) supersedes the NTA; when there is
paragraph (2) notice, it is that notice which informs the alien
when to appear, not the NTA.

															Now turn back to §1229a. As noted before, for
the statutory scheme to make sense, “notice in accordance with
paragraph (1) or (2)” in §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii) must correspond with
“the written notice” mentioned in §1229a(b)(5)(A). And
§1229a(b)(5)(A) contemplates a very specific process. An alien
“shall be ordered removed in absentia” when he “does not attend
a proceeding under this section” and the Government
establishes, among other things, that “the written notice was so
provided.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, “the written notice” is tied to
the singular proceeding missed, and at which the alien was “removed
in absentia.” Whether that notice was issued under paragraph (1) as
an NTA or under paragraph (2), it is that notice which the
Government must prove was provided to remove an alien in absentia.
And it is that notice which the alien must prove was not
provided in order to have his in absentia removal order
rescinded.

															This reading aligns with common sense. See
Koons Buick Pontiac GMC, Inc. v. Nigh,
543 U.S.
50, 63 (2004) (“ ‘[T]here is no canon against using common
sense in construing laws as saying what they obviously mean’ ”
(quoting Roschen v. Ward, 279
U.S. 337, 339 (1929)). The Government does not argue that
either a paragraph (1) or a paragraph (2) notice is always
sufficient regardless of which corresponds to the hearing the alien
missed. A simple hypothetical demonstrates why. Suppose the
Government sent a fully compliant NTA to the alien, specifying the
time, date, and place of the hearing. Suppose then that the
Government changed the hearing date without sending any notice
whatsoever to the alien, and that the alien was ordered removed in
absentia at that hearing. Literally, the alien received “notice in
accordance with paragraph (1) or (2).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). But no
one would say the alien is thereby ineligible to seek rescission of
a removal order entered at a hearing for which he never received
notice.

															The only way to make sense of
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)’s reference to a single notice is for that
notice to be the one that matters: the one that informed the alien
of the time and date of the hearing the alien missed, and at which
he was ordered removed. That reading also gives the provision a
“substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law.”
United Sav. Assn. of Tex. v. Timbers of Inwood Forest
Associates, Ltd., 484 U.S.
365, 371 (1988). Recall the other two scenarios in which an in
absentia removal order may be rescinded. In those, the alien must
either demonstrate that “the failure to appear was because of
exceptional circumstances,” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), or that he “was in
Federal or State custody and the failure to appear was through no
fault of the alien,” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii). For either, relief is
conditioned upon the alien’s showing he was not at fault for
failing to appear. See §1229a(e)(1) (defining “exceptional
circumstances” to be “beyond the control of the alien”). We think
Congress had the same idea in the third scenario. The alien’s
failure to appear is excused by his failure to receive a paragraph
(1) or (2) notice only if that notice would have informed the alien
of the relevant hearing.

															C

															Finally, we must decide whether Campos-Chaves,
Singh, and Mendez-Colín received “notice in accordance with
paragraph (1) or (2)” for the hearings they missed. We hold that
they did, and that their in absentia removal orders thus may not be
rescinded on that ground.

															The Government concedes—as it must under
Pereira and Niz-Chavez—that none of the aliens
received an NTA compliant with §1229(a)(1). Each alien’s NTA
provided only that the time of the hearing was “TBD” or “to be
set,” which is the sort of language we found to be inadequate in
Pereira. See 585 U. S., at 206 (NTA which ordered alien
to appear “ ‘on a date to be set at a time to be set’ ”
was insufficient to satisfy §1229(a)(1)). This litigation thus
turns on whether the aliens received “notice in accordance with
paragraph . . . (2).” §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).

															They each did. Paragraph (2) provides that, “in
the case of any change or postponement in the time and place” of
removal proceedings, “a written notice shall be given” to the alien
that includes “the new time or place of the proceedings” and the
consequences of “failing . . . to attend such
proceedings.” §1229(a)(2)(A). Each requirement was met here.
Campos-Chaves, Singh, and Mendez-Colín were notified of the time of
the hearing and the consequences of failing to appear. Those times
were all “new”: those notices were the first time any of the aliens
were informed when those specific hearings would take place. And
those notices were for the hearings which they missed, and at which
they were ordered removed. All three thus in fact received “notice
in accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” within the meaning of
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).

															The aliens argue otherwise, focusing on the
requirement that paragraph (2) notice be given “in the case of any
change or postponement in the time and place of such proceedings.”
In their view, there cannot have been a “change” in the time of the
proceedings if no time had ever been set. The same goes for the
requirement that paragraph (2) notice give “the new time or place
of the proceedings.” According to the aliens, there cannot be a
“new” time without an old time. In effect, the aliens think that
there cannot be paragraph (2) notice without an earlier paragraph
(1) notice.

															We reject both textual arguments. The aliens
take too narrow a reading of the term “change.” In their telling,
“change” means “substitution,” and substitution presupposes that
there was a date before. See Brief for Petitioner Campos-Chaves
16–17. But to “change” can also mean “to replace with another or
others of the same kind or class,” “to switch to another,” to
“alter,” or to “modify.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 373–374 (1986). What happened here fits under any of
those definitions. The notice of hearing Campos-Chaves received
“changed”—that is, “replaced,” “switched,” or “substituted”—a “date
to be set” and a “time to be set” to “Sep 20, 2005,” and “9:00
A.M.,” respectively. App. 50. The notice of hearing Singh received
“changed” the “TBD” in his NTA to “Dec. 12, 2018,” and “9:00 A.M.”
Id., at 1. And the notice of hearing Mendez-Colín received
“changed”—that is, “altered” or “modified”—the time and place of
his proceedings by adding a hearing on September 15, 2003, at 9
a.m. The aliens’ cramped reading of “change” is out of place here,
especially given that the statute refers to “any change.”
§1229(a)(2) (emphasis added); see Patel v. Garland,
596 U.S. 328, 338 (2022) (“[T]he word ‘any’ has an expansive
meaning” (some internal quotation marks omitted)).

															The aliens’ argument that a “new” time or place
requires an “old” time or place fares no better. In fact, it runs
against how that word is ordinarily used. No one thinks that
congratulating a couple on having a “new” baby implies that the
couple is replacing an “old” baby. The word “new” describes
something that has “originated or occurred lately,” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary, at 1522, or is “novel,” ibid.
The times provided by the aliens’ notices of hearing were all those
things. The first occasion on which Campos-Chaves, Singh, and
Mendez-Colín were informed of the time of the particular hearing
was when they received their hearing notices. Nonetheless, they
failed to show up at those hearings, and in their absence they were
ordered removed. They received a “notice in accordance with”
paragraph (2), and thus cannot seek rescission under
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii).

															Finally, the aliens argue that we have already
decided that a paragraph (2) notice requires that the alien has
received an adequate NTA. They point to our statement in
Pereira that “paragraph (2) presumes that the Government has
already served [an NTA] that specified a time and place” because
“[o]therwise, there would be no time or place to ‘change or
postpon[e].’ ” 585 U. S., at 210 (quoting §1229(a)(2)).
That case concerned the “narrow question” of the operation of the
so-called stop-time rule. Id., at 202. To be eligible for
cancellation of removal relief, an alien must have been “physically
present in the United States for a continuous period of not less
than 10 years.” §1229b(b) (1)(A). Under the stop-time rule,
however, an alien’s time in the country generally ceases to count
when he “is served a notice to appear under section 1229(a).”
§1229b(d)(1)(A). In Pereira, we decided that, for a notice
to qualify as an NTA and to trigger the stop-time rule, it must
include time and place information. Id., at 202.

															We did not reach out to decide today’s question
in that case. The meaning of §1229(a)(2) was not at issue in
Pereira. Indeed, when the Government in Pereira
argued that §1229b(d)(1)(A)’s reference to a “notice to appear
under section 1229(a)” referred to paragraph (2) as well, the
Court’s first—and sufficient—response was that the “broad
reference” to §1229(a) was “of no consequence,” because “only
paragraph (1) bears on the meaning of a ‘notice to appear.’ ”
Id., at 209. Only then did the Court go on to state the
language on which the aliens rely so heavily—that paragraph (2)
“presumes” an adequate NTA, and that paragraph (2) therefore,
“[i]f anything,” “bolsters” the bottom-line conclusion that
an NTA must include time and place information. Ibid.
(emphasis added). To the extent Pereira discussed paragraph
(2), its language was mere dicta.[1]

															Today’s decision does not mean that the
Government is free of its obligation to provide an NTA. That
document has an important place within the statutory scheme because
it contains information that aliens may need to present their case,
including the conduct for which they are charged and the provisions
of law they allegedly violated. See §§1229(a)(1)(A)–(E). Although
an alien who receives only paragraph (2) notice must still attend
the hearing or face in absentia removal, he can raise issues
regarding incomplete notice at that time. That gives the
immigration judge a chance to reschedule the hearing to cure any
prejudice from the missing information. But §1229a(b)(5)(C)(ii)
does not allow aliens to seek rescission of removal orders in
perpetuity based on arguments they could have raised in a hearing
that they chose to skip.

															*  *  *

															We affirm the judgment of the Fifth Circuit
and reverse the Ninth Circuit’s judgment in Garland v.
Mendez-Colín. We vacate the Ninth Circuit’s judgment in
Garland v. Singh, and remand that case for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.[2]

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The aliens’ invocation of
Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U.S. 155 (2021), fares no
better. In that case, we recognized that §1229(a)(2) “permits [the
Government] to send a supplemental notice amending the time and
place of an alien’s hearing if logistics require a change.”
Id., at 170. Thus, if it turns out that the chosen time and
place in the NTA is inconvenient, the Government is free to amend
it through a paragraph (2) notice. Ibid. That point remains
true even if there are other instances in which paragraph (2)
notices may issue.
2
 The Ninth Circuit’s
holding that Singh had shown that he failed to receive “notice in
accordance with paragraph (1) or (2)” meant that it did not reach
his alternative argument that he could seek rescission under
§1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). 24 F. 4th 1315, 1320 (2020). Neither do
we.


