::decision_cite:: 22-721
::decision_name::  McElrath v. Georgia
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–721

															_________________

															DAMIAN McELRATH, PETITIONER v.
GEORGIA

															on writ of certiorari to the supreme court of
georgia

															[February 21, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Under Georgia law, a jury’s verdict in a
criminal case can be set aside if it is “repugnant”—meaning that it
involves “affirmative findings by the jury that are not legally and
logically possible of existing simultaneously.” 308 Ga. 104, 111,
839 S.E.2d 573, 579 (2020). In this case, a jury found that
petitioner Damian McElrath was “not guilty by reason of insanity”
with respect to a malice-murder count, but was “guilty but mentally
ill” regarding two other counts—felony murder and aggravated
assault—all of which pertained to the same underlying homicide.
Invoking the repugnancy doctrine, Georgia courts nullified both the
“not guilty” and “guilty” verdicts, and authorized McElrath’s
retrial.

															McElrath now maintains that the Fifth
Amendment’s Double Jeopardy Clause prevents the State from retrying
him for the crime that had resulted in the “not guilty by reason of
insanity” finding. Under the circumstances presented here, we
agree. The jury’s verdict constituted an acquittal for double
jeopardy purposes, and an acquittal is an acquittal notwithstanding
its apparent inconsistency with other verdicts that the jury may
have rendered.

															I

															A

															This case begins with tragedy. In 2012,
petitioner Damian McElrath, then 18 years old, killed his mother
Diane. Diane, a single parent who had adopted McElrath when he was
two years old, struggled for years with caring for him. At a young
age, McElrath was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. He responded poorly to psychiatric
treatment and sometimes refused to take his prescribed medication.
He had trouble in school, including suspensions and low grades, and
experienced several run-ins with law enforcement. These issues,
among others, led to quarrels between McElrath and his mother.

															A few years before Diane’s murder, McElrath’s
mental health began to deteriorate substantially, eventually
manifesting in his belief that Diane was poisoning his food and
drink with ammonia and pesticides. At some point, McElrath began to
exhibit other delusions, such as a belief that he was an FBI agent
who regularly traveled to Russia and had killed multiple people.
These delusions intensified to the point that, just a few weeks
before the events giving rise to this case, McElrath was committed
to a mental-health facility, where he was diagnosed with
schizophrenia. After two weeks of hospitalization, clinical staff
believed that McElrath was no longer a threat to himself or others
and that there was no evidence of further delusions. Thus, McElrath
was discharged.

															One week later, McElrath stabbed Diane to death.
Immediately after the stabbing, McElrath composed a note in which
he explained that he had killed Diane because she had been
poisoning him and that she had in fact confessed to doing so.
McElrath then called 911; he told the dispatch officer that he had
killed his mother and asked if his actions were wrong. After law
enforcement arrived at the scene, McElrath was taken to a police
station for interrogation, where he told the investigator, “I
killed my Mom because she poisoned me.” 308 Ga., at 105, 839
S. E. 2d, at 575 (internal quotation marks omitted).

															B

															Georgia charged McElrath with three crimes
stemming from Diane’s death: malice murder, felony murder, and
aggravated assault. At trial, McElrath did not dispute that he
killed Diane but asserted an insanity defense.

															Under Georgia law, a jury may find a criminal
defendant “not guilty by reason of insanity” if, at the time of the
crime, he “did not have mental capacity to distinguish between
right and wrong” or he committed the crime “because of a delusional
compulsion as to such act which overmastered his will to resist
committing the crime.” Ga. Code Ann. §§16–3–2, 16–3–3,
17–7–131(c)(1) (2019). Such a verdict results in the defendant’s
commitment to a state mental-health facility until a court
determines that release is appropriate. §17–7–131(d). Even if a
defendant fails to prove an insanity defense, a Georgia jury may
still render a verdict of “guilty but mentally ill,” under which
the State Department of Corrections may, at its discretion, refer a
defendant for temporary mental-health treatment. §§17–7–131(c)(2),
(g).

															The jury returned a split verdict against
McElrath. It found him not guilty by reason of insanity on the
malice-murder charge and guilty but mentally ill on the
felony-murder and aggravated-assault charges. The trial court
accepted the jury’s verdict, and eventually sentenced McElrath to
life imprisonment based on the felony-murder conviction.[1]

															McElrath appealed. He argued that the
felony-murder conviction should be vacated because the
guilty-but-mentally-ill verdict for that crime was “repugnant” to
the jury’s “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict for malice
murder. See 308 Ga., at 112, 839 S. E. 2d, at 579 (explaining
that, under Georgia’s so-called “repugnancy” doctrine, a state
court may set aside a verdict as repugnant when there are
“affirmative findings by the jury that are not legally and
logically possible of existing simultaneously”).

															The Supreme Court of Georgia agreed with
McElrath that the verdicts were repugnant under Georgia
law.[2] As the court explained,
“the not guilty by reason of insanity verdict on malice murder and
the guilty but mentally ill verdict on felony murder based on
aggravated assault required affirmative findings of different
mental states that could not exist at the same time during the
commission of those crimes as they were indicted, proved, and
charged to the jury.” Ibid. There was no way to reconcile
those verdicts because, as the court noted, the jury could not
conclude “that the crimes occurred at different times or through
distinct acts.” Ibid., n. 15, 839 S. E. 2d, at
579, n. 15. But instead of vacating only the felony-murder
conviction, as McElrath had requested, the State Supreme Court
vacated both the malice-murder and felony-murder verdicts.
Id., at 112, 839 S. E. 2d, at 580.[3]

															On remand, McElrath argued that the Double
Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment prohibited Georgia from
retrying him for malice murder in light of the jury’s prior “not
guilty by reason of insanity” verdict on that charge. The trial
court rejected this argument, and McElrath again appealed.

															The Supreme Court of Georgia affirmed. 315 Ga.
126, 880 S.E.2d 518 (2022). The court recognized that, “[u]nder the
general principles of double jeopardy,” the verdict of not guilty
by reason of insanity “would appear to be an acquittal that
precludes retrial, as not guilty verdicts are generally inviolate.”
Id., at 130, 880 S. E. 2d, at 521. But the court
concluded that the acquittal at issue in this case “los[t]
considerable steam” when considered alongside the verdict of guilty
but mentally ill, and because the verdicts were repugnant, “both
[were] rendered valueless.” Ibid. In the court’s view,
repugnant verdicts were no different for double jeopardy purposes
from “a situation in which a mistrial is declared after a jury is
unable to reach a verdict.” Ibid., 880 S. E. 2d, at
522.

															Justice Pinson concurred, noting that he could
not “quite shake the doubt” that the court’s ruling was
inconsistent “with the quite-absolute-sounding bar against retrying
a defendant who has secured an acquittal verdict.” Id., at
132, 880 S. E. 2d, at 523. He joined the majority, however,
because “[t]his lingering doubt [was] not enough to justify
dissenting from an otherwise unanimous Court.” Id., at 133,
880 S. E. 2d, at 523.

															We granted certiorari. 600 U. S. ___
(2023).

															II

															The Double Jeopardy Clause provides that “[n]o
person shall . . . be subject for the same offence to be
twice put in jeopardy of life or limb.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 5.
The “controlling constitutional principle” of the Clause “focuses
on prohibitions against multiple trials.” United States v.
Martin Linen Supply Co., 430 U.S.
564, 569 (1977) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[I]t has
long been settled under the Fifth Amendment that a verdict of
acquittal is final, ending a defendant’s jeopardy, and
. . . is a bar to a subsequent prosecution for the same
offence.” Green v. United States, 355 U.S.
184, 188 (1957) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															What, then, is an acquittal? “[O]ur cases have
defined an acquittal to encompass any ruling that the prosecution’s
proof is insufficient to establish criminal liability for an
offense.” Evans v. Michigan, 568
U.S. 313, 318 (2013). “[L]abels do not control our analysis in
this context; rather, the substance of [the ruling] does.”
Id., at 322. In particular, we look to whether the ruling’s
substance “relate[s] to the ultimate question of guilt or
innocence.” United States v. Scott, 437 U.S.
82, 98, n. 11 (1978) (internal quotation marks
omitted).

															Once rendered, a jury’s verdict of acquittal is
inviolate. We have described this principle—“that ‘[a] verdict of
acquittal . . . could not be reviewed, on error or
otherwise’ ”—as “[p]erhaps the most fundamental rule in the
history of double jeopardy jurisprudence.” Martin Linen, 430
U. S., at 571. This bright-line rule exists to preserve the
jury’s “overriding responsibility . . . to stand between
the accused and a potentially arbitrary or abusive Government that
is in command of the criminal sanction.” Id., at 572.

															We have long recognized that, while an acquittal
might reflect a jury’s determination that the defendant is innocent
of the crime charged, such a verdict might also be “the result of
compromise, compassion, lenity, or misunderstanding of the
governing law.” Bravo-Fernandez v. United States, 580
U.S. 5, 10 (2016); see also United States v. Powell,
469 U.S.
57, 65 (1984). Whatever the basis, the Double Jeopardy Clause
prohibits second-guessing the reason for a jury’s acquittal. As a
result, “the jury holds an unreviewable power to return a verdict
of not guilty even for impermissible reasons.” Smith v.
United States, 599 U.S. 236, 253 (2023) (internal quotation
marks and alterations omitted).

															For double jeopardy purposes, a jury’s
determination that a defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity
is a conclusion that “criminal culpability had not been
established,” just as much as any other form of acquittal.
Burks v. United States, 437 U.S.
1, 10 (1978). Such a verdict reflects “that the Government
ha[s] failed to come forward with sufficient proof of [a
defendant’s] capacity to be responsible for criminal acts.”
Ibid.

															III

															Georgia law specifically provides that a
defendant who establishes an insanity defense “shall not be found
guilty of [the] crime.” Ga. Code Ann. §§16–3–2, 16–3–3. Here, after
being instructed on Georgia’s insanity defense, see
App. 89a–92a, the jury concluded that McElrath was not guilty
by reason of insanity with respect to the malice-murder charge.
That jury determination was unquestionably a “ruling that the
prosecution’s proof is insufficient to establish criminal liability
for an offense.” Evans, 568 U. S., at 318; see also
Burks, 437 U. S., at 10.

															This conclusion is consistent with Georgia’s
concession that if the “not guilty” verdict were considered in
isolation—that is, if the jury had reached the same conclusion
under the same circumstances on a single count—it would have
constituted a valid verdict of acquittal under state law. See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 31–32. As we have long recognized, jeopardy clearly
terminates under these circumstances. See United States v.
Ball, 163 U.S.
662, 671 (1896); see also 6 W. LaFave, J. Israel, N. King,
& O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure §25.3(b), p. 821 (4th ed.
2015) (describing this principle as “the cornerstone of double
jeopardy jurisprudence”).

															In resisting this straightforward conclusion,
the State reiterates the Georgia Supreme Court’s holding that,
because the “not guilty by reason of insanity” verdict was
repugnant to the jury’s other verdicts, all the verdicts the jury
rendered in McElrath’s case were “a nullity and should not have
been accepted by the trial court.” 315 Ga., at 127, 880 S. E.
2d, at 520. Georgia thus maintains that, because no verdict under
state law issued, no acquittal took place.

															We cannot agree. To start, it is well
established that whether an acquittal has occurred for purposes of
the Double Jeopardy Clause is a question of federal, not state,
law. Again, an acquittal occurs when there has been a ruling
“relat[ing] to the ultimate question of guilt or innocence.”
Scott, 437 U. S., at 98, n. 11 (internal quotation
marks omitted). And “labels”—including those provided by state
law—“do not control our analysis in this context.” Evans,
568 U. S., at 322. Thus, it is not dispositive whether a
factfinder “incanted the word ‘acquit’ ”; instead, an
acquittal has occurred if the factfinder “acted on its view that
the prosecution had failed to prove its case.” Id., at 325.
Because of this focus on substance over labels, a State’s
“characterization, as a matter of double jeopardy law, of [a
ruling] is not binding on us.” Smalis v.
Pennsylvania, 476 U.S.
140, 144, n. 5 (1986); see also Smith v.
Massachusetts, 543 U.S.
462, 468–469 (2005).

															To be sure, “[t]he States possess primary
authority for defining and enforcing the criminal law,”
Engle v. Isaac, 456 U.S.
107, 128 (1982)—a power that permits States “to regulate
procedures under which [their] laws are carried out,”
Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S.
197, 201 (1977). But the ultimate question is whether the
Double Jeopardy Clause recognizes an event as an acquittal. In
making that determination, we ask whether—given the operation of
state law—there has been “any ruling that the prosecution’s proof
is insufficient to establish criminal liability for an offense.”
Evans, 568 U. S., at 318. Here, for the reasons already
discussed, the jury’s verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity
constituted such a determination.[4]

															That McElrath’s “not guilty by reason of
insanity” verdict was accompanied by other verdicts that appeared
to rest on inconsistent findings is of no moment. As we have
explained, the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits second-guessing an
acquittal for any reason. See Martin Linen, 430 U. S.,
at 571. An acquittal is an acquittal, even “when a jury returns
inconsistent verdicts, convicting on one count and acquitting on
another count, where both counts turn on the very same issue of
ultimate fact.” Bravo-Fernandez, 580 U. S., at 8. As
far as the Fifth Amendment is concerned, “[i]nconsistency in a
verdict is not a sufficient reason for setting it aside.”
Harris v. Rivera, 454 U.S.
339, 345 (1981) (per curiam).

															Georgia contends that this bar to
second-guessing an acquittal applies only to general
verdicts of acquittal, because in evaluating a general verdict,
there is no way to ascertain the true basis of the jury’s decision.
Here, by contrast, the jury based its verdicts on specific
“affirmative findings of different mental states that could not
exist at the same time.” 308 Ga., at 112, 839 S. E. 2d, at
579. Georgia maintains that, under the State’s repugnancy doctrine,
such “special findings” allow for an informed review (and potential
nullification) of inconsistent jury verdicts, including a verdict
of acquittal. Brief for Respondent 39.

															Georgia is mistaken. Once there has been an
acquittal, our cases prohibit any speculation about the
reasons for a jury’s verdict—even when there are specific jury
findings that provide a factual basis for such speculation—“because
it is impossible for a court to be certain about the ground for the
verdict without improperly delving into the jurors’ deliberations.”
Smith, 599 U. S., at 252–253. We simply cannot know why
the jury in McElrath’s case acted as it did, and the Double
Jeopardy Clause forbids us to guess. “To conclude otherwise would
impermissibly authorize judges to usurp the jury right.”
Id., at 252.

															*  *  *

															The jury’s verdict of not guilty by reason of
insanity on the malice-murder charge was an acquittal for purposes
of the Double Jeopardy Clause. The Clause therefore bars retrial of
McElrath on that charge.[5] The
judgment of the Supreme Court of Georgia is reversed, and the case
is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this
opinion.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The aggravated-assault
conviction merged into the felony-murder conviction because, under
Georgia law, it served as a predicate for felony murder. See
Culpepper v. State, 289 Ga. 736, 737, 715 S.E.2d 155,
157 (2011).
2
 McElrath appealed
directly to the Supreme Court of Georgia, which has appellate
jurisdiction over all murder cases. See Ga. Const., Art. VI,
§6, ¶3; see also Neal v. State, 290 Ga. 563, 567, 722
S.E.2d 765, 770 (2012) (Hunstein, C. J., concurring) (noting
that the Georgia Constitution provides the State Supreme Court with
“jurisdiction to decide direct appeals in life-imprisonment murder
cases”).
3
 Georgia represents that,
outside of this case, the Georgia Supreme Court has applied the
repugnancy rule only once, in Turner v. State, 283
Ga. 17, 655 S.E.2d 589 (2008). See Brief in Opposition 15. In
contrast with McElrath’s case, the court in Turner vacated
only the guilty verdicts, leaving the jury’s verdict of acquittal
intact. See 283 Ga., at 21, 655 S. E. 2d, at 592.
4
 We need not, and do not,
address the Double Jeopardy Clause’s application to a trial judge’s
rejection of inconsistent or incomprehensible jury findings under
state law. Cf. Brief for Missouri et al. as AmiciCuriae
7–8. What is at issue here is Georgia’s claim that, when a
not-guilty verdict on one count is inconsistent with a guilty
verdict on another count, double jeopardy poses no barrier to
retrial on the former.
5
 On remand, the Georgia
courts may address as a matter of state law the status of
McElrath’s vacated conviction for felony murder. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 64–67.


