::decision_cite:: 22-704
::decision_name::  Vidal v. Elster
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–704

															_________________

															KATHERINE K. VIDAL, UNDER SECRETARY OF
COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND DIRECTOR, UNITED STATES
PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE, PETITIONER v. STEVE ELSTER

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the federal circuit

															[June 13, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, concurring in the judgment.

															This case involves a free-speech challenge to a
viewpoint-neutral, content-based condition on trademark
registration. In deciding how to evaluate this kind of challenge,
the Court faces two options: Either look only to the history and
tradition of the condition, or look to trademark law and settled
First Amendment precedent. The first option, which asks whether the
history of a particular trademark registration bar plays well with
the First Amendment, leads this Court into uncharted territory that
neither party requests. The other guides it through well-trodden
terrain. I would follow the well-trodden path.

															In assessing the constitutionality of the names
clause and other trademark registration provisions, I would rely on
this Court’s tried-and-tested First Amendment precedent. This Court
has held in a variety of contexts that withholding benefits for
content-based, viewpoint-neutral reasons does not violate the Free
Speech Clause when the applied criteria are reasonable and the
scheme is necessarily content based. That is the situation here.
Content discrimination is an inescapable feature of the trademark
system, and federal trademark registration only confers additional
benefits on trademark holders. The denial of trademark registration
is therefore consistent with the First Amendment if it turns on
“reasonable, viewpoint-neutral content regulations.” Iancu
v. Brunetti, 588 U.S. 388, 424 (2019) (Sotomayor, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part). Because the names
clause satisfies that test, I would uphold the constitutionality of
the provision on that ground alone.

															I

															A

															This case is the latest in a trilogy of
challenges to the constitutionality of trademark registration bars
in the Lanham Act. See id., at 390; Matal v.
Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 223 (2017). In the first two cases, the
Court struck down as unconstitutional certain registration bars
that discriminated based on viewpoint. Ante, at 4–5
(majority opinion) (citing Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 390,
393–394; Tam, 582 U. S., at 243 (plurality opinion);
id., at 248–249 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment). Because those cases involved
viewpoint-based provisions, there was no occasion to consider the
framework for “how to evaluate viewpoint-neutral restrictions on
trademark registration.” Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 398,
n. This case, by contrast, presents that very circumstance—a
viewpoint-neutral, content-based condition on trademark
registration.

															The names clause prohibits registration of a
mark that “[c]onsists of or comprises a name . . .
identifying a particular living individual except by his written
consent.” 15 U. S. C. §1052(c). No one disputes that the
names clause is content based. Its application turns, after all, on
the mark’s content, i.e., whether it identifies by
name a particular living individual without his or her written
consent. See City of Austin v. Reagan Nat. Advertising of
Austin, LLC, 596 U.S. 61, 69 (2022) (explaining that a
regulation is content based if its application turns on “ ‘the
topic discussed or the idea or message expressed’ ”). The
names clause is also viewpoint neutral because it is agnostic as to
how the name in the mark is being used and does not “distinguis[h]
between two opposed sets of ideas.” Brunetti, 588
U. S., at 394; see ante, at 5 and n. 2 (majority
opinion) (holding that the clause is viewpoint neutral both on its
face and in practice). On these points, and on the conclusion that
the names clause is constitutional, we all agree. Our disagreement
boils down primarily to methodology.

															B

															Those familiar with this trilogy of First
Amendment challenges to the Lanham Act may be surprised, perhaps
even disappointed, to learn that, although this case presents the
“situation we did not address in Tam or Brunetti,”
the Court has shied away from setting forth a “framework ‘for
deciding free speech challenges to provisions of the Lanham
Act.’ ” Ante, at 6 (majority opinion) (quoting
Tam, 582 U. S., at 245, n. 17 (plurality
opinion)). Yet perhaps the biggest surprise (and disappointment) of
today’s five-Justice majority opinion is its reliance on history
and tradition as a dispositive test to resolve this case.

															In holding that the names clause is
constitutional, that majority asserts that one need look only to
the “history and tradition” of the clause and “no further.”
Ante, at 12. Why look to history and tradition alone?
Because, the majority says, it “is sufficient to conclude that the
names clause . . . is compatible with the First
Amendment.” Ibid. Considering this Court has never applied
this kind of history-and-tradition test to a free-speech challenge,
and that “[n]o one briefed, argued, or even hinted at the rule that
the Court announces today,” one would have expected a more
satisfactory explanation. Lozman v. Riviera Beach,
585 U.S. 87, 102 (2018) (Thomas, J., dissenting). There is none
grounded in our First Amendment doctrine and precedent.

															Justice Barrett questions the majority’s
because-it-is-sufficient explanation in part by claiming that, if
anything, the Court’s evidence “does not establish a historical
analogue for the names clause.” Ante, at 1 (opinion
concurring in part). That may well be true. Yet this back-and-forth
highlights the indeterminacy of the Court’s history-and-tradition
inquiry, which one might aptly describe as the equivalent of
entering a crowded cocktail party and looking over everyone’s heads
to find your friends. Cf. Conroy v. Aniskoff,
507 U.S.
511, 519 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment). To make
matters worse, the five-Justice majority that undertakes this
tradition-as-dispositive inquiry found its friends in a crowded
party to which it was not invited. That majority has drawn
conclusive inferences from its historical evidence, all without any
guidance from the litigants or the court below. That stark
departure from settled principles of party presentation and
adversarial testing in favor of in-chambers historical research by
nonhistorians raises more questions than answers. Cf.
Maslenjak v. United States, 582 U.S. 335, 354 (2017)
(Gorsuch, J., joined by Thomas, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment) (“[T]he crucible of adversarial testing on
which we usually depend, along with the experience of our
thoughtful colleagues on the district and circuit benches, could
yield insights (or reveal pitfalls) we cannot muster guided only by
our own lights”).

															It is not appropriate, much less necessary, to
find common-law analogues to settle the constitutionality of the
names clause or any other trademark registration provision. I agree
with Justice Barrett that, even if the majority’s historical
“evidence were rock solid,” there is no good reason to believe that
“hunting for historical forebears on a restriction-by-restriction
basis is the right way to analyze the constitutional question.”
Ante, at 1, 13. The majority attempts to reassure litigants
and the lower courts that a “history-focused approac[h]” here is
sensible and workable, by citing to New York State Rifle &
Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (2022).
Ante, at 19, n. 4. To say that such reassurance is not
comforting would be an understatement. One need only read a handful
of lower court decisions applying Bruen to appreciate the
confusion this Court has caused. Cf. Brief for Second Amendment Law
Scholars as Amici Curiae in United States v.
Rahimi, O. T. 2023, No. 22–915, pp. 4–6 (discussing examples
of confusion among lower courts applying Bruen).

															Ultimately, I am reluctant to go further down
this precipice of looking for questionable historical analogues to
resolve the constitutionality of Congress’s legislation. To borrow
Justice Scalia’s criticism from a different context, such hunting
“far into the dimmy past” is not just “a waste of research time and
ink” but also “a false and disruptive lesson in the law
. . . that . . . condemns litigants (who,
unlike us, must pay for it out of their own pockets) to subsidizing
historical research by lawyers.” Conroy, 507 U. S., at
519 (opinion concurring in judgment). I would instead apply this
Court’s First Amendment precedent, just as the parties did in
arguing this case.

															C

															The most straightforward way to resolve this
and other free-speech challenges to trademark registration criteria
is through a doctrinal framework drawn from this Court’s First
Amendment precedent. The analysis should proceed in two steps.
First ask whether the challenged provision targets particular views
taken by speakers on a given subject. If the trademark registration
bar is viewpoint based, it is presumptively unconstitutional and
heightened scrutiny applies; if it is viewpoint neutral, however,
the trademark registration bar need only be reasonable in light of
the purpose of the trademark system. Specifically, the trademark
registration bar must reasonably serve its purpose of identifying
and distinguishing goods for the public. If the challenged
provision is both viewpoint neutral and reasonable, then it does
not violate the Free Speech Clause.

															II

															A

															This Court has applied strict constitutional
scrutiny to viewpoint-neutral content classifications on some
occasions, and thus treated them as “presumptively
unconstitutional.” Reed v. Town of Gilbert, 576 U.S.
155, 163 (2015). It has declined to do so, however, when any
“risk” that such classification “will impermissibly interfere with
the marketplace of ideas” is “attenuated”; that is, when
“ ‘there is no realistic possibility that official suppression
of ideas is afoot.’ ” Davenport v. Washington Ed.
Assn., 551 U.S.
177, 188–189 (2007) (quoting R. A. V. v.
St. Paul, 505 U.S.
377, 390 (1992)). In those cases, “the difference between
viewpoint-based and viewpoint-neutral content discrimination can be
decisive.” Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 421 (opinion of
Sotomayor, J.). This is such a case: Whereas the denial of
trademark registration under viewpoint- and content-based criteria
is presumptively unconstitutional under heightened scrutiny, a
denial under viewpoint-neutral, content-based criteria is not
constitutionally suspect and does not trigger the same exacting
scrutiny. See ante, at 3–12 (majority opinion).

															In explaining why the difference is decisive in
this context, the Court and Justice Barrett emphasize that
trademarks are inherently content based, yet have long coexisted
with the First Amendment. Ante, at 6–11 (majority opinion);
ante, at 2–7 (opinion of Barrett, J.). I agree with the use
of historical evidence to support this point. History informs the
understanding that content-based distinctions are an intrinsic
feature of trademarks, and that the marks’ purpose is to identify
and distinguish goods for the public. See ante, at 2–6
(opinion of Barrett, J.). That use of history is legitimate and in
fact valuable, just as evidence of a longstanding practice of
government can inform the meaning of constitutional provisions in
appropriate cases. See ante, at 13–15 (opinion of
Barrett, J.); cf. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
v. Community Financial Services Assn. of America, Ltd., 601
U.S. 416, 442 (2024) (Kagan, J., concurring); The Pocket Veto
Case, 279 U.S.
655, 689 (1929). That is not how the five-Justice majority is
using history, however. The majority instead treats a disputed (and
isolated) account of the history and tradition of the names clause
as determinative of its constitutionality. Cf. ante, at
12–20 (applying new history-and-tradition test). It is that
“judge-made test” that is unmoored from constitutional text and
precedent, and which I repudiate as unhelpful. Ante, at 14
(opinion of Barrett, J.).

															Even then, history does not give us the full
story. The assertion that content-based distinctions in trademark
law have long played well with the First Amendment, although true,
requires a more fulsome explanation, particularly as applied to the
trademark registration system. The primary reason why
viewpoint-neutral trademark registration criteria easily coexist
with the Free Speech Clause is that they do not burden expression.
Instead, a denial of registration withholds ancillary benefits that
might bolster someone’s expression. When a government confers a
benefit that supports some forms of expressive activity, the
decision to withhold that benefit on viewpoint-neutral grounds
“ ‘cannot be equated with the imposition of a “penalty” on
that activity,’ ” which would trigger heightened scrutiny.
Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S.
173, 193 (1991) (quoting Harris v. McRae,
448 U.S.
297, 317, n. 19 (1980)).

															1

															“The First Amendment protects the freedom of
speech; it does not require the Government to give aid and comfort
to those using” particular “modes of expression.” Brunetti,
588 U. S., at 401 (Roberts, C. J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part). Indeed, this Court has recognized repeatedly
that the First Amendment permits governmental bodies to rely on
reasonable, viewpoint-neutral, content-based criteria when deciding
to benefit certain communicative activities. See, e.g.,
National Endowment for Arts v. Finley, 524 U.S.
569, 587–588 (1998) (“[T]he Government may allocate competitive
funding according to criteria that would be impermissible were
direct regulation of speech or a criminal penalty at stake”).

															As I explained in Brunetti, and the
Solicitor General argues in this case, various strands of precedent
support this point, ranging from cases about limited public (or
nonpublic) forums to those involving monetary subsidies and noncash
governmental programs (such as the collection of fees by
public-sector labor unions). See 588 U. S., at 422–424
(collecting cases); Brief for Petitioner 16–21 (same).[1] In these cases, content
discrimination was necessarily a part of the governmental
initiative at issue, yet the initiative was not subject to the
constitutional straitjacket of heightened scrutiny. See,
e.g., Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local
Educators’ Assn., 460 U.S.
37, 49 (1983) (noting that content discrimination is
“[i]mplicit in the concept of the nonpublic forum,” yet declining
to apply heightened scrutiny). That was so because each “initiative
. . . supported some forms of expression without
restricting others. Some speakers were better off, but no speakers
were worse off.” Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 423 (opinion
of Sotomayor, J.).

															These cases “may not be controlling [here] in a
strict sense, yet they do provide some instruction.” Legal
Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U.S.
533, 544 (2001). They generally stand for the proposition that
the Free Speech Clause permits governmental bodies to impose a
“reasonable, viewpoint-neutral limitation” on a “state-bestowed
entitlement.” Davenport, 551 U. S., at 189; see,
e.g., Christian Legal Soc. Chapter of Univ. of
Cal., Hastings College of Law v. Martinez, 561 U.S.
661, 669 (2010) (upholding “reasonable, viewpoint-neutral
condition” on access to government initiative); Ysursa v.
Pocatello Ed. Assn., 555 U.S.
353, 355 (2009) (same); Cornelius v. NAACP Legal
Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U.S.
788, 808 (1985) (same); Regan v. Taxation With
Representation of Wash., 461 U.S.
540, 550 (1983) (same).[2]

															2

															Someone with a federally registered mark
enjoys certain benefits by virtue of that registration. Even so,
free speech is not abridged when these benefits are denied to
someone based on reasonable, viewpoint-neutral criteria.

															Consider three basic tenets of trademark law,
each of which the Court rightly acknowledges. See ante, at
1–2. First, “every trademark’s ‘primary’ function” is to tell the
public who is responsible for a particular product, that is, to
serve as a source identifier. Jack Daniel’s Properties, Inc.
v. VIP Products LLC, 599 U.S. 140, 146 (2023). Although
trademarks may also communicate a “message,” that message is only
incidental to “what a trademark is and does.” Id., at
145–146. Second, “federal law does not create trademarks.”
B&B Hardware, Inc. v. Hargis Industries,
Inc., 575 U.S.
138, 142 (2015). Rather, by virtue of common law, the first
person to use a “distinct mark in commerce . . . acquires
rights to that mark,” including exclusivity rights to “preven[t]
others from using the mark.” Ibid. Third, federal
registration provides increased trademark protection only by
conferring additional benefits on trademark holders. See
ibid. For example, it (1) provides “nationwide constructive
notice of the registrant’s claim of ownership of the mark,” which
forecloses some defenses in infringement actions; and (2)
constitutes “prima facie evidence” of the mark’s validity and
exclusivity in commerce. Ante, at 2 (citing 15
U. S. C. §§1072, 1115(a)). To be sure, nothing in the
Constitution requires these predominantly commercial benefits.

															One conclusion follows from these three
principles: By prohibiting trademark registration for
viewpoint-neutral, content-based reasons, Congress simply denies an
applicant the opportunity to include his mark on a list and secure
“certain benefits” that are “useful in infringement litigation.”
Jack Daniel’s, 599 U. S., at 146. The risk of speech
suppression is therefore “attenuated” because denying a trademark
holder these ancillary benefits does not prevent him from using his
mark in commerce or communicating any message incidental to the
mark. Davenport, 551 U. S., at 188; see
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 421–422 (opinion of Sotomayor,
J.); id., at 401 (opinion of Roberts, C. J.) (“Whether
. . . marks can be registered does not affect the extent
to which their owners may use them in commerce to identify goods.
No speech is being restricted; no one is being punished. The owners
of such marks are merely denied certain additional benefits
associated with federal trademark registration”).

															B

															Now consider the facts of this case.
Respondent Steve Elster wants to sell shirts with the phrase TRUMP
TOO SMALL on them. He also wants increased trademark protection by
federally registering the phrase. In the registration request,
Elster explained that the phrase “invokes a memorable exchange
between President Trump and Senator Marco Rubio from a 2016
presidential primary debate, and aims to ‘convey[ ] that some
features of President Trump and his policies are
diminutive.’ ” In re Elster, 26 F. 4th 1328,
1330 (CA Fed. 2022) (alteration in original).

															When the U. S. Patent and Trademark Office
rejected the registration request, it denied Elster the opportunity
to secure the Government-bestowed benefits associated with
registration. Critically, the denial did not prevent Elster from
communicating his message. It also did not restrict his preferred
mode of expression. Elster can still sell shirts displaying the
same message. Elster could also use a different phrase (such as
ELSTER APPAREL) as a source identifier to obtain the desired
benefits of registration while continuing to sell shirts with his
preferred message across the front. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 23–24
(discussing “Elster Apparel” example). Put simply, the denial only
barred Elster from registering a mark asserting exclusive rights in
another person’s name without their written consent.

															III

															A

															Because trademark registration criteria limit
statutory benefits in a necessarily content-based scheme, the First
Amendment requires the criteria to be viewpoint neutral and
reasonable. Supra, at 5–9; Brunetti, 588 U. S.,
at 424 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). From this Court’s analogous
nonpublic-forum and limited-public-forum cases, it is clear that
“reasonable” means that the challenged provision must reasonably
serve the purpose of the content-based scheme. On this point, I
agree with Justice Barrett that the challenged trademark
registration criteria must be “reasonable in light of the trademark
system’s purpose of facilitating source identification.”
Ante, at 2; see ante, at 7–9.

															In Cornelius, for example, the Court
confronted a free-speech challenge to the Government’s decision to
exclude “legal defense and political advocacy organizations from
participation in the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC or Campaign), a
charity drive aimed at federal employees.” 473 U. S., at 790.
After concluding that the CFC was a nonpublic forum “not dedicated
to general debate or the free exchange of ideas,” the Court held
that the First Amendment permits content- and speaker-based
“distinctions” so long as they are “reasonable in light of the
purpose served by the forum and are viewpoint neutral.” Id.,
at 806, 811. Importantly, the “decision to restrict access
. . . need not be the most reasonable or the only
reasonable limitation.” Id., at 808–809. Based on this test,
the Court ultimately concluded that the Government acted
reasonably, and consistent with the Free Speech Clause, in
“limit[ing] participation in the CFC in order to minimize
disruption to the federal workplace, to ensure the success of the
fundraising effort, or to avoid the appearance of political
favoritism without regard to the viewpoint of the excluded groups.”
Id., at 813.

															Justice Thomas (joined by two Justices) rejects
this test, implying that it is subjective because it supposedly
turns on what a given judge might think is reasonable. Ante,
at 20. That statement misunderstands the inquiry. As just
discussed, a trademark registration condition is reasonable if it
serves as a source identifier, a concept that is familiar to anyone
who has worked on a trademark case. See Jack Daniel’s, 599
U. S., at 146; 1 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair
Competition §3:1 (5th ed. 2023). More generally, this kind of
reasonableness inquiry appears in every limited public (or
nonpublic) forum case. Far from being subjective and unworkable,
this kind of test goes to the very core of what judges and lawyers
do every day. When contrasted to their preferred history-driven
approach, the criticism of the reasonableness inquiry is even more
unpersuasive. As discussed above, the history-and-tradition
approach is not just flawed as a matter of first principles, but
also highly indeterminate and unfamiliar to judges and litigants in
this area of the law. See supra, at 3–5. How much history is
enough to clear the historical analogue bar the five-Justice
majority set up? What does that look like in this context? When it
comes to subjectivity, their preferred approach empowers judges to
pick their friends in a crowded party. See supra, at 4. When
faced with the two options, I choose the test that is rooted in
this Court’s First Amendment doctrine and precedent, is attuned to
what judges and lawyers are properly trained to do, and does not
limit Congress from dealing with modern-day conditions based on the
foresight of yesterday’s generation.

															B

															“Content-based criteria for trademark
registration do not abridge the right to free speech so long as
they reasonably relate to the preservation of the markowner’s
goodwill and the prevention of consumer confusion,” “goals” that a
“particular restriction will serve . . . if it helps
ensure that registered marks actually function as source
identifiers.” Ante, at 8 (opinion of Barrett, J.) The names
clause easily passes this reasonableness test. Source
identification is, after all, at the heart of what the names clause
does.

															Imagine someone who wants to manufacture and
sell the best bats and catchers’ mitts in baseball. Unsurprisingly,
that person wants to use the names of Derek Jeter and Jorge Posada
to capitalize on their goodwill to promote the products. So, the
manufacturer lands on JETER OUT OF THE PARK and CATCH LIKE POSADA
as marks. The names clause bars registration of these phrases
without the named individuals’ written consent. It does so for good
reason: Jeter and Posada may not want consumers to misattribute
these products to them, just as consumers may not want to buy
products under the false pretense that these goods somehow are
connected to the players.[3]
Source identification is especially important when, for example,
the named individual produces similar products—say, Jeter and
Posada sell their own baseball goods under the marks MR. NOVEMBER
BATS BY JETER and CHAMP’S MITTS BY POSADA. They would not want
manufacturers to dilute the commercial value of their name and
reputation. Nor would Jeter and Posada want a Boston Red Sox fan to
manufacture cheaper goods and use their names to promote
second-rate products. The names clause prevents that from
happening.

															Congress was entitled to make this legislative
judgment. The Government, after all, “has a reasonable interest in
refraining from lending its ancillary support to marks” that use an
unconsenting individual’s name for commercial gain.
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 425 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.);
cf. id., at 401 (opinion of Roberts, C. J.) (“The
Government, meanwhile, has an interest in not associating itself
with trademarks whose content is obscene, vulgar, or profane”). In
sum, the names clause is constitutional because it is a
viewpoint-neutral, reasonable limitation on a trademark’s
registration.

															*  *  *

															The Court’s “decision today is narrow,” and
its history-and-tradition test is good only for “the relatively
simple case before us today.” Ante, at 20, 22. Ultimately,
all nine Justices agree that Congress can innovate when it comes to
trademark law, and we further agree that nothing in today’s opinion
calls into question the constitutionality of viewpoint-neutral
provisions lacking a historical pedigree. See ibid.;
ante, at 1 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part); ante,
at 1–2 (opinion of Barrett, J.); supra, at 3–6.

															For the reasons set forth above, I respectfully
concur in the judgment.

Notes
1
 According to Justice
Thomas (who is joined by two Justices), I focus primarily on
cash-subsidy and union-dues cases. A closer look at this opinion
and the cases that I cite will reveal that is not exactly true. As
I mentioned in Brunetti, and both the Government and Justice
Barrett assert in this case, limited public (or nonpublic) forum
cases also constitute helpful analogies for arriving at the
generally applicable principles that should apply to this kind of
case. See Brief for Petitioner 18–19; accord, ante, at 7–9,
and n. 2 (opinion of Barrett, J.).
2
 Justice Thomas responds
that these precedents are an “ill fit” for the names clause because
this case does not involve “cash subsid[ies],” “union dues,” or a
“limited public forum.” Ante, at 20–21. That response misses
the entire point. In the past, this Court has relied on
limited-public-forum cases as instructive, even if not controlling,
when resolving constitutional challenges to governmental subsidies
(and vice versa). See, e.g., Legal Services
Corporation, 531 U. S., at 544. The Court relied on these
decisions for their underlying legal principle only. That is, after
all, how law works. That the trademark registration system does not
involve cash subsidies, union dues, or a limited public forum is
immaterial for purposes of the analysis in this opinion. As just
discussed, the legal principle in each of these cases is that the
Constitution permits reasonable, viewpoint-neutral limitations on
speech where, as here, the Government only benefits certain forms
of expression through initiatives that are intrinsically content
based without restricting other expression.
3
 Other Lanham Act
provisions prohibit the registration of marks that deceive or
falsely suggest a connection to a person or entity. See 15
U. S. C. §1052(a). That there is some overlap between the
false-suggestion and names clauses does not change the fact that
the names clause reasonably serves the purpose of source
identification. When heightened scrutiny is not in play, Congress
is free to use belts and suspenders to support an asserted
interest. I therefore also agree with Justice Barrett that
“Congress is entitled to make [the] categorical judgmen[t]
. . . that, on the whole, protecting marks that include
another living person’s name without consent risks undermining the
goals of trademark.” Ante, at 9.


