::decision_cite:: 22-704
::decision_name::  Vidal v. Elster
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–704

															_________________

															KATHERINE K. VIDAL, UNDER SECRETARY OF
COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND DIRECTOR, UNITED STATES
PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE, PETITIONER v. STEVE ELSTER

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the federal circuit

															[June 13, 2024]

															

															Justice Barrett, with whom Justice Kagan
joins, with whom Justice Sotomayor joins as to Parts I, II, and
III–B, and with whom Justice Jackson joins as to Parts I and II,
concurring in part.

															While I agree with the Court that the names
clause does not violate the First Amendment, I disagree with some
of its reasoning. The Court claims that “history and tradition”
settle the constitutionality of the names clause, rendering it
unnecessary to adopt a standard for gauging whether a content-based
trademark registration restriction abridges the right to free
speech. That is wrong twice over. First, the Court’s evidence,
consisting of loosely related cases from the late-19th and
early-20th centuries, does not establish a historical analogue for
the names clause. Second, the Court never explains why hunting for
historical forebears on a restriction-by-restriction basis is the
right way to analyze the constitutional question. I would adopt a
standard, grounded in both trademark law and First Amendment
precedent, that reflects the relationship between content-based
trademark registration restrictions and free speech. In my view,
such restrictions, whether new or old, are permissible so long as
they are reasonable in light of the trademark system’s purpose of
facilitating source identification.

															I

															Content-based speech regulations are, as a
general matter, “presumptively unconstitutional.” Reed v.
Town of Gilbert, 576 U.S.
155, 163 (2015). “The rationale of the general prohibition,” we
have explained, “is that content discrimination ‘raises the specter
that the Government may effectively drive certain ideas or
viewpoints from the marketplace.’ ”
R. A. V. v. St. Paul,
505 U.S.
377, 387 (1992) (quoting Simon & Schuster, Inc. v.
Members of N. Y. State Crime Victims Bd., 502 U.S.
105, 116 (1991)). But we have also recognized that in certain
situations, this presumption is inapplicable, as “ ‘there is
no realistic possibility that official suppression of ideas is
afoot.’ ” Davenport v. Washington Ed. Assn.,
551 U.S.
177, 189 (2007) (quoting
R. A. V., 505 U. S., at
390).

															I agree with the Court that content-based
trademark registration restrictions do not trigger the presumption
of unconstitutionality. See ante, at 6. Because federal
trademark law did not exist at the founding—and American trademark
law did not develop in earnest until the mid-19th century—I do not
take the Court to be making a claim about the original meaning of
the Free Speech Clause. But, as the Court implicitly recognizes,
the absence of founding-era evidence does not mean that
content-based trademark registration restrictions are inherently
suspect. More than a century’s worth of precedent reflects that
trademark law has always been content based without functioning as
a ready tool of Government censorship. The First Amendment does not
require us to upend this longstanding, stable system by treating
trademark restrictions as “presumptively unconstitutional.”
Reed, 576 U. S., at 163.

															A

															As the Court explains, trademark law existed
at the founding, albeit in nascent form. Ante, at 7; B.
Pattishall, The Constitutional Foundations of American Trademark
Law, 78 Trademark Rep. 456, 457–459 (1988). From the outset,
trademark protection “was an inherently content-based endeavor.”
Ante, at 7. Early English and American laws prohibited
producers from placing another producer’s trademark on their
goods—a prohibition that depended on comparing the content of the
mark with the content of the allegedly infringing use. Ante,
at 7–8. That alone does not prove that every type of
content-based trademark regulation should escape heightened
scrutiny. More relevant is that courts and legislatures, in
identifying the marks that merit legal protection, have long
discriminated on the basis of content. Ante, at 9–10. This
history, in my view, is key to understanding why we need not
evaluate content-based trademark registration restrictions under
heightened scrutiny.

															Once trademark law got off the ground in the
mid-19th century, it had an unmistakably content-based character.
Thomson v. Winchester, the first reported American
trademark case, involved two parties who both sold medicine under
the name “ ‘Thomsonian Medicines.’ ” 36 Mass. 214, 216
(1837). See E. Rogers, Some Historical Matter Concerning
Trade-Marks, 9 Mich. L. Rev. 29, 42 (1910). The Court cites
this case as reflective of the content-based nature of trademark
protection. Ante, at 8–9. True, Thomson explained
that the defendant could be liable if he had sold his goods under
the plaintiff ’s name as an attempted fraud. 36 Mass., at 216.
But the court explained that the result would be different if the
defendant “call[ed his goods] Thomsonian as a generic term
designating their general character.” Ibid. That was because
Thomson, the plaintiff, could not claim an exclusive right to use
the name “if [the] term had acquired a generic meaning, descriptive
of a general kind, quality and class of medicines.” Ibid. In
other words, whether a word or phrase could qualify for trademark
protection depended on “its communicative content.” Reed,
576 U. S., at 163.

															Roughly 10 years later, the New York Superior
Court further developed this content-based principle in Amoskeag
Mfg. Co. v. Spear & Ripley, 2 Sandf. 599 (1849),
long “ ‘regarded as the leading American adjudication’ ”
of a trademark dispute. B. Pattishall, Two Hundred Years of
American Trademark Law, 68 Trademark Rep. 121, 125 (1978). The
court agreed that “[e]very manufacturer . . . has an
unquestionable right to distinguish the goods that he manufactures
or sells, by a peculiar mark or device, in order that they may be
known as his.” Amoskeag, 2 Sandf., at 605. But the law will
only “protec[t him] in the exclusive use” of marks that
“designat[e] the true origin or ownership”—i.e., the
source—of the goods. Id., at 606. The manufacturer cannot
claim a protectable trademark in “words, letters, figures or
symbols” that indicate only the “name or
quality”—i.e., not the source—of the goods.
Ibid. After all, those who produce similar goods could use
the same words or symbols “with equal truth”—thus, they should have
“an equal right to employ [them], for the same purpose.”
Id., at 607.

															Courts repeated and applied this rule for
decades. See, e.g., Wolfe v. Goulard,
18 How. Pr. 64, 67 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1859); Falkinburg v.
Lucy, 35 Cal. 52, 64 (1868); Filley v.
Fassett, 44 Mo. 168, 176–177 (1869); Congress Spring
Co. v. High Rock Spring Co., 45 N.Y. 291, 295 (1871).
For instance, a gin manufacturer could not claim an exclusive right
to the term “Schiedam Schnapps” if it already served as a common
descriptor of gin. Wolfe, 18 How. Pr., at 67. But a stove
manufacturer could trademark the term “ ‘Charter Oak,’ ”
as a distinctive phrase not “merely descriptive of the style,
quality, or character” of the product. Filley, 44 Mo., at
176–177. Then, as now, courts understood that a mark merits
protection only so far as it “identif[ies] the article to which it
is affixed as that of the person adopting it, and distinguish[es]
it from others.” Gillott v. Esterbrook, 47 Barb. 455,
462 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1867), aff ’d, 48 N.Y. 374 (1872);
see also Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 223 (2017). This
inquiry is inherently content based.

															The ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment in
1868, which incorporated the First Amendment against the States,
did not prompt courts to change course.[1] They continued to scrutinize proposed marks based on
their content. Likewise, this Court’s first trademark decision,
issued in 1871, invoked Amoskeag’s content-based criteria to
define those trademarks “entitled to legal protection.” Canal
Co. v. Clark, 13 Wall. 311, 323–324 (1872) (concluding
that “geographical names,” including “ ‘Pennsylvania
wheat’ ” and “ ‘Virginia tobacco,’ ” could not be
protected as trademarks, as they “point only at the place of
production, not to the producer”). See ante, at 10. Thus, at
the earliest point at which the First Amendment could have applied
to trademark law, content discrimination, particularly with respect
to the very definition of a trademark, was the norm.

															Trademark registration restrictions followed
suit. Federal registration, though not required to enforce a
trademark, “confers important legal rights and benefits on
trademark owners” and thus “helps to ensure that trademarks are
fully protected.” Matal, 582 U. S., at 225–226
(internal quotation marks omitted). Unsurprisingly, as the Court
notes, Congress’s first trademark statute included certain
content-based restrictions for federal registration. See Act of
July 8, 1870, §§77, 79, 16Stat. 210–211; ante, at 9. And
today, each of the Lanham Act’s registration criteria refers to the
content of the applicant’s mark. See 15 U. S. C. §1052.
Thus, just as courts have long identified the criteria for
trademark protection along content-based lines, Congress has
defined the rules for enhanced trademark protection along
content-based lines.

															B

															The upshot is that content discrimination has
long been “necessary for [trademark’s] purposes and limitations.”
See Legal Services Corporation v. Velazquez,
531 U.S.
533, 543 (2001) (considering the “accepted usage” of a
“particular medium” to determine the constitutionality of speech
restrictions within that medium). The law protects trademarks
because they help consumers identify the goods that they intend to
purchase and allow producers to “reap the financial rewards
associated with the[ir] product’s good reputation.” Jack
Daniel’s Properties, Inc. v. VIP Products LLC, 599 U.S.
140, 146 (2023); see also Falkinburg, 35 Cal., at 64. But
trademarks can only fulfill these twin goals if they actually serve
as source identifiers, see Jack Daniel’s, 599 U. S., at
146, which, as explained above, is a content-based question, see
supra, at 4–5.

															These content-based trademark rules have long
coexisted with the Free Speech Clause, and their function is
generally compatible with it. Courts have applied content-based
rules not to “suppres[s] . . . ideas,” but simply to
serve trademark law’s purposes. See Davenport, 551
U. S., at 189 (internal quotation marks omitted). Indeed,
these trademark restrictions can actually help prevent
“interfere[nce] with the marketplace of ideas,” id., at 188,
insofar as they ensure that a single producer cannot exclusively
appropriate words or phrases in the general domain, see
Wolfe, 18 How. Pr., at 67. This is not to say that the
Government could not abuse content-based trademark registration
restrictions—as I explain below, such restrictions are not
insulated from scrutiny. But they do not set off alarm bells
signaling the likelihood that “ ‘official suppression of ideas
is afoot.’ ” Davenport, 551 U. S., at 189 (quoting
R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 390).
Therefore, I agree with the Court that we need not treat
content-based trademark registration restrictions as presumptively
unconstitutional. Ante, at 6.

															II

															Though content-based registration restrictions
do not trigger strict scrutiny, they are still subject to judicial
review. Thus, we must decide how to evaluate Elster’s challenge to
the names clause.

															The Solicitor General suggests that we draw an
analogy to another area that is inherently content based: the
limited public forum. When the government opens its property to
speech for a particular purpose, creating a limited public forum,
it necessarily must “reserv[e the property] for certain groups or
for the discussion of certain topics.” Rosenberger v.
Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515
U.S. 819, 829 (1995). Content-based restrictions are “inherent
and inescapable” in maintaining a forum for speech “compatible with
the intended purpose of the property.” Perry Ed. Assn. v.
Perry Local Educators’ Assn., 460 U.S.
37, 49 (1983). It is therefore inappropriate to view these
restrictions as presumptively unconstitutional and apply strict
scrutiny. Still, not every restriction is permissible. To evaluate
these rules, we ask “whether they are reasonable in light of the
purpose which the forum at issue serves.” Ibid. This ensures
that the government “respect[s] the lawful boundaries it has itself
set.” Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 829.

															Though I would not shoehorn the trademark
registration system into the definition of a “limited public
forum,” the Solicitor General’s analogy is apt.[2] Content discrimination is “[i]mplicit in the
concept of ” the trademark registration system much like it is
in a limited public forum. Perry, 460 U. S., at 49.
Federal registration “help[s] protect marks” by conferring strong
legal rights on markowners who register them. B&B Hardware,
Inc. v. Hargis Industries, Inc., 575
U.S. 138, 142 (2015). Congress provided for “national
protection of trademarks in order to secure to the owner of the
mark the goodwill of his business and to protect the ability of
consumers to distinguish among competing producers,” matching
trademark’s historical goals. Park ’N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar
Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U.S.
189, 198 (1985); see supra, at 4–5. A mark can only
fulfill those goals to the extent that it “tells the public who is
responsible for [the] product.” Jack Daniel’s, 599
U. S., at 146. This is a content-based requirement.

															Content-based criteria for trademark
registration do not abridge the right to free speech so long as
they reasonably relate to the preservation of the markowner’s
goodwill and the prevention of consumer confusion. A particular
restriction will serve those goals if it helps ensure that
registered marks actually function as source identifiers. Notably,
“the lead criterion for registration is that the mark ‘in fact
serve as a “trademark” to identify and distinguish goods.’ ”
Ibid. (quoting 3 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair
Competition §19:10 (5th ed. 2023) (McCarthy)). Other registration
criteria help to carry out that threshold requirement. For
instance, the Lanham Act prohibits the registration of marks that
are “merely descriptive” of the applicant’s goods. 15
U. S. C. §1052(e)(1). As courts frequently explained in
the early years of trademark, marks that simply describe the kind
and quality of the good do not necessarily identify its source. See
supra, at 4–5. The bar on registering “deceptive” marks
likewise prevents registered marks from misidentifying the source
of the goods. §1052(a).

															The names clause passes muster under this test.
A trademark that includes another living person’s name without her
consent has the obvious potential to create source confusion.
Further, the clause helps protect producer goodwill. By freely
using another person’s name in her mark, the markowner can unfairly
capitalize on the reputation of the named individual, who may be a
producer in her own right. Conversely, if the markowner’s goods or
services are shoddy, she might jeopardize the named individual’s
reputation.

															Elster protests that consumers would not assume
that Donald Trump is responsible for the mark “ ‘Trump too
small.’ ” Brief for Respondent 35. Thus, he argues that even
if the names clause generally guards against source confusion,
refusing to register his proposed mark does not. But Congress is
entitled to make categorical judgments, particularly where
heightened scrutiny does not apply. The Government can reasonably
determine that, on the whole, protecting marks that include another
living person’s name without consent risks undermining the goals of
trademark. The names clause is therefore constitutional, both
facially and as applied to Elster’s mark.

															III

															Rather than adopt a generally applicable
principle, the Court assesses the names clause in isolation,
treating the supposed history and tradition of the clause as
determinative. In my view, the historical record does not alone
suffice to demonstrate the clause’s constitutionality. For one
thing, the record does not support the Court’s conclusion. For
another, I disagree with its choice to treat tradition as
dispositive of the First Amendment issue.

															A

															First, the Court’s history. It is true that “a
tradition of restricting the trademarking of names” arose in the
late 19th century. Ante, at 19. As the Court says, a
personal name by itself, without any accompanying words or symbols,
did not typically qualify as a trademark. See McLean v.
Fleming, 96 U.S.
245, 252–253 (1878); ante, at 13. And a person could not
always enforce a trademark including her own name against another
with the same name. See Brown Chemical Co. v. Meyer,
139 U.S.
540, 542 (1891); ante, at 14.[3] The first federal trademark statute reflected these
principles, prohibiting the registration of a mark that was “merely
the name of a person, firm, or corporation only, unaccompanied by a
mark sufficient to distinguish it from the same name when used by
other persons.” §79, 16Stat. 211. Today, the Lanham Act continues
to bar the registration of a mark that is “primarily merely a
surname.” 15 U. S. C. §1052(e)(4).

															But the Court also claims that the common law
did not afford protection to a person seeking a trademark including
another living person’s name (in other words, a rule akin to
the names clause). Ante, at 14. I am less sure. In
Thaddeus Davids Co. v. Davids Mfg. Co., 233 U.S.
461 (1914), this Court explained that the 1905 federal
trademark statute contained “a fairly complete list of the marks
used by dealers in selling their goods, which are not valid
trademarks at common law.” Id., at 467 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Notably, this statute did not include the names
clause or any rough equivalent.[4] And if such a common-law rule existed, the majority
opinion does not identify it. Instead, the Court draws from sources
suggesting that a person could not enforce a trademark with another
individual’s name against that individual. See ante,
at 14–15. Nor could she fraudulently attempt to pass off her goods
as those of another person, using that person’s name. Ante,
at 14. So far, so good. Yet the names clause prevents other uses of
someone else’s name that the common law may have allowed. And on
that score, the Court does not fully grapple with countervailing
evidence.

															In 1860, the Supreme Court of Rhode Island
concluded that the phrase “ ‘Roger Williams Long Cloth’ ”
was “capable of distinguishing” the manufacturer’s goods and thus
qualified as a trademark. Barrows v. Knight, 6
R. I. 434, 438. “ ‘Roger Williams,’ though the name of a
famous person,” the Court explained, was, “as applied to cotton
cloth, a fancy name,” as would be the case with “any other her[o],
living or dead.” Ibid. (emphasis added). Likewise, a
New York court upheld the plaintiffs’ exclusive right to use the
name “Bismarck” to designate their paper collars, as they were the
first to “appropriate” the name for that purpose. Messerole
v. Tynberg, 4 Abb. Pr. (N. S.) 410, 414 (Ct. Com. Pl. 1868).
The court thus rejected the defendant’s argument that the
plaintiffs could not adopt “the name of a distinguished German
citizen” as a trademark. Id., at 412. Summarizing, the
Second Circuit explained that “[t]he law permits the adoption as a
trade-mark of the name of a person who has achieved fame and
distinction, provided the name is not descriptive of the quality or
the character of the article or a geographical name.” Stephano
Bros., Inc. v. Stamatopoulos, 238 F. 89, 93 (1916). See
also Medlar & Holmes Shoe Co. v. Delsarte Mfg.
Co., 46 A. 1089 (N. J. Ch. Ct. 1900) (“The name of a
famous person, used merely as a fancy name, may become an exclusive
trade-mark”); W. Browne, Law of Trade-Marks §216, pp. 225–226
(2d ed. 1885) (same).[5]

															The legislative history of the Lanham Act also
undercuts the Court’s conclusion. If the names clause codified an
existing common-law tradition, one might expect to see some
reference to that tradition when the names clause was adopted. But
proponents of the clause offered a different justification.
Discussing a predecessor version of the clause, Edward Rogers, the
Lanham Act’s primary drafter, remarked that “[t]he idea of
prostituting great names by sticking them on all kinds of goods is
very distasteful to me.” Trade-Marks: Hearings on H. R. 9041
before the Subcommittee on Trade-Marks, House Committee on Patents,
75th Cong., 3d Sess., 79 (1938) (H. R. 9041); see J. Litman,
Keynote Address, 39 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L. J. 855, 856
(2021). The Commissioner of the Patent Office agreed, noting the
“shock to [his] sense of propriety to see liberty taken
. . . with the names of celebrities of private life.”
H. R. 9041, at 79. He then referred to the attempted
registration of “the name of the Duchess of Windsor for brassieres
and ladies’ underwear.” Ibid. They did not suggest that the
common law would already prevent those uses of another’s name as a
trademark. On the contrary, they seemed most concerned about the
types of marks that the common law appeared to allow. See
supra, at 11.

															It is thus difficult to say that the names
clause is constitutional solely because of its historical
pedigree.[6] Perhaps
recognizing that reality, the Court relies not only on the
purported common-law tradition restricting the trademarking of
names, but also points to the names clause’s relation to
trademark’s historical purposes. Ante, at 16–18. The latter
argument is quite similar to my own—I agree that the names clause
helps to ensure that the proposed mark functions as a source
identifier and to guard against reputational consequences, serving
trademark’s historical goals.

															B

															But I cannot agree with the Court that the
existence of a “common-law tradition” and a “historical analogue”
is sufficient to resolve this case. Ante, at 19–20. Even if
the Court’s evidence were rock solid, I still would not adopt this
approach. To be sure, tradition has a legitimate role to play in
constitutional adjudication. For instance, the longstanding
practice of the political branches can reinforce our understanding
of the Constitution’s original meaning. Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Assn. of
America, Ltd., 601 U.S. 416, 442 (2024) (Kagan, J.,
concurring). A course of deliberate practice might liquidate
ambiguous constitutional provisions. See The Federalist No. 37,
p. 229 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). The views of preceding
generations can persuade, and, in the realm of stare
decisis, even bind. But tradition is not an end in itself—and I
fear that the Court uses it that way here.

															The Court does not (and could not) argue that
the late-19th and early-20th century names-restriction tradition
serves as evidence of the original meaning of the Free Speech
Clause. Cf. Samia v. United States, 599 U.S. 635,
655–656 (2023) (Barrett, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). Nor does it treat the history it recites as a persuasive
data point. Instead, it presents tradition itself as the
constitutional argument; the late-19th and early-20th century
evidence is dispositive of the First Amendment issue. Yet what is
the theoretical justification for using tradition that way?

															Relying exclusively on history and tradition may
seem like a way of avoiding judge-made tests. But a rule rendering
tradition dispositive is itself a judge-made test. And I do
not see a good reason to resolve this case using that approach
rather than by adopting a generally applicable principle. (After
all, there is a tradition of the latter approach too. See,
e.g., McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 421
(1819) (adopting standard for application of the Necessary and
Proper Clause).) In the course of applying broadly worded text like
the Free Speech Clause, courts must inevitably articulate
principles to resolve individual cases. I do not think we can or
should avoid doing so here. As I explained in Part I–B, the
takeaway from history is that content-based trademark restrictions
have long been central to trademark’s purpose of facilitating
source identification, and they have not posed a serious risk of
censorship. This principle offers a generally applicable way to
think about whether registration restrictions “ ‘play well
with the First Amendment.’ ” Ante, at 12. We should
bring clarity to the law by adopting it.

															In my view, the Court’s laser-like focus on the
history of this single restriction misses the forest for the trees.
It gives secondary billing to what I think is the central point:
that the names clause “reflects trademark law’s historical
rationale of identifying the source of goods.” Ante, at 16.
I see no reason to proceed based on pedigree rather than principle.
Besides, as the Court admits, its approach merely delays the
inevitable: Eventually, the Court will encounter a restriction
without a historical analogue and be forced to articulate a test
for analyzing it. Ante, at 19–20.

															*  *  *

															Trademark protection cannot exist without
content discrimination. So long as content-based registration
restrictions reasonably relate to the purposes of the trademark
system, they are constitutional. The names clause clears this bar.
I respectfully concur in part.

Notes
1
 There would have been no
reason for courts to consider the relationship between the First
Amendment and trademark law before 1868. Before incorporation, the
First Amendment applied only to the Federal Government, and there
was no federal trademark law until 1870. Ante, at
8–9.
2
 Justice Thomas mistakenly
suggests that I present the federal trademark register as a limited
public forum. Ante, at 21. That is not myposition. Rather, I
view the content-based nature of the limited public forum as
analogous to the trademark registration system. Moreover, by
characterizing my argument as a conclusory statement that the
limited public forum framework is “ ‘apt,’ ” Justice
Thomas ignores my reasons for drawing the analogy.
Ibid.
3
 By the early-20th
century, however, courts enforced personal-name marks even against
“newcomer[s] with the same name when confusion over source [was]
the likely result.” 2 McCarthy §13:8; see L. E. Waterman Co.
v. Modern Pen Co., 235 U.S.
88, 94 (1914).
4
 The Thaddeus Court
referred specifically to the statute’s prohibition on the
registration of marks that “consis[t] merely of individual, firm or
corporate names, not written or printed in a distinctive manner, or
of designations descriptive of the character or quality of the
goods with which they are used, or of geographical names or terms.”
233 U. S., at 467.
5
 The Court dismisses my
examples as irrelevant because several involve the names of dead
individuals. Ante, at 19, n. 4. But “[t]he exclusive
right to grace paper collars with Bismarck’s name was granted while
he was still alive.” J. Pike, Personal Names as Trade Symbols, 3
Mo. L. Rev. 93, 101 (1938) (Pike). And the other authorities
either expressly recognized that the names of famous living persons
could be trademarked, see Barrows, 6 R. I., at 438, or
did not indicate whether the rule differed for dead versus living
individuals, see Stephano Bros., 238 F., at 92–93. Indeed,
“[t]he authorities [were] somewhat meagre” as to “the rule
. . . . where the notable person [was] still alive,”
Pike 100, undercutting the notion that the common law contained a
clear rule one way or the other.
6
 The Court characterizes
my critique as a demand for a “historical twin.” Ante, at
19, n. 4. On the contrary, my point is that the Court has not
cleared the “historical analogue” bar it sets for itself. The
existence of closely analogous historical counterexamples surely
complicates the argument that “history and tradition” alone
establish the clause’s constitutionality. By presenting its
evidence as conclusive, “the Court overclaims.” Samia v.
United States, 599 U.S. 635, 657 (2023) (Barrett, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment).


