::decision_cite:: 22-899
::decision_name::  Smith v. Arizona
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–899

															_________________

															JASON SMITH, PETITIONER v. ARIZONA

															on writ of certiorari to the court of appeals
of arizona, division one

															[June 21, 2024]

															

															Justice Alito, with whom the Chief Justice
joins, concurring in the judgment.

															Today, the Court inflicts a needless,
unwarranted, and crippling wound on modern evidence law. There was
a time when expert witnesses were required to express their
opinions as responses to hypothetical questions. But eventually,
this highly artificial, awkward, confusing, and abuse-laden form of
testimony earned virtually unanimous condemnation. More than a
century ago, judges, evidence scholars, and legal reform
associations began to recommend that courts abandon the required
use of hypotheticals, and more than 50 years ago, the Federal Rules
of Evidence did so. Now, however, the Court proclaims that a
prosecution expert will frequently violate the Confrontation Clause
when he testifies in strict compliance with the Federal Rules of
Evidence and similar modern state rules. Instead, the Court
suggests that such experts revert to the form that was buried a
half-century ago. Ante, at 18. There is no good reason for
this radical change.

															I

															To explain why I think the Court has gone far
astray, I begin with a brief look at the history of expert
testimony—and particularly, why the hypothetical-question
requirement was replaced by the (superior) mode of testimony
allowed by the Federal Rules of Evidence.

															A

															Expert testimony presents a challenge for a
legal system like ours that restricts a fact-finder’s ability to
consider hearsay. This is so because an expert’s opinion very often
is based on facts that are not proved in court. As a modern
treatise puts it, the value of experts lies in their ability to
“brin[g] to bear a body of knowledge largely extraneous to the
facts of the particular case.” D. Kaye, D. Bernstein, A. Ferguson,
M. Wittlin, & J. Mnookin, The New Wigmore: Expert Evidence
§1.2.1, p. 4 (3d ed. 2021) (Kaye). Wigmore made the same point when
he wrote that “[n]o one professional man can know from personal
observation more than a minute fraction of the data which he must
every day treat as working truths.” 1 J. Wigmore, Evidence §665(3),
p. 762 (1904) (Wigmore). Instead, experts routinely “rel[y] on the
reported data of fellow-scientists, learned by perusing their
reports in books and journals.” Id., at 762–763 (emphasis
deleted); see also Kaye §4.1, at 165 (“[P]art of an expert’s very
expertise inevitably derive[s] from hearsay”).

															Despite this problem, courts in Great Britain
and this country long ago recognized the value of expert testimony
and concluded that they “must . . . accept this kind of
knowledge from scientific men,” even if it meant allowing testimony
based on facts of which the expert did not have firsthand
knowledge. See 1 Wigmore 763; 1 S. Greenleaf, Evidence §430(l), p.
529 (rev. 16th ed. 1899) (“It would be absurd to deny judicial
standing to such knowledge, because all scientific data must be
handed down from generation to generation by hearsay, and each
student can hope to test only a trifling fraction of scientific
truth by personal experience”); Slocovich v. Orient Mut.
Ins. Co., 108 N.Y. 56, 64, 14 N.E. 802, 805 (1888) (“An expert
is qualified to give evidence as to things which he has never seen.
He may base an opinion upon facts proved by other witnesses, or
upon facts assumed and embraced within the case”).

															Recognizing this reality, a court in the
late-18th century admitted expert testimony about the seaworthiness
of a ship based on a survey conducted when the expert was not
present. Thornton v. Royal Exchange Assurance Co.,
Peake 37, 38, 170 Eng. Rep. 70, 71 (N. P. 1790). Similarly, an
early-19th century decision allowed ship surveyors to testify to
the seaworthiness of a vessel they had never seen. Beckwith
v. Sydebotham, 1 Camp. 116, 170 Eng. Rep. 897 (N. P. 1807).
The opposing party objected that the experts did not know the
underlying facts to be true, but the court admitted their opinions
because the experts’ technical knowledge could assist the jury.
Ibid. The fact that “the truth of the facts stated to them
was not certainly known” went to the weight of the testimony, not
its admissibility. Ibid.

															Throughout the 19th and into the 20th century,
experts generally testified in the form of an opinion in response
to a hypothetical question. An attorney would ask an expert to
assume that certain facts were true and would then query whether a
particular conclusion could conceivably follow. See 3 S. Saltzburg,
M. Martin, D. Capra, & J. Berch, Federal Rules of Evidence
Manual §703.02[1] (13th ed. 2023).

															This procedure was highly artificial because it
bore little resemblance to the way in which experts actually form
opinions. And the procedure surely did not conform to the way lay
jurors think and speak.

															The procedure’s aim was to prevent a jury from
jumping to the conclusion that the facts packed into the
hypothetical were true, but it is questionable whether the practice
achieved that objective. For instance, here is the question that
defense counsel asked a psychiatric witness in Charles Guiteau’s
trial for murdering President Garfield:

															“Q. . . . Assume it to be a fact
that there was a strong hereditary taint of insanity in the blood
of the prisoner at the bar; also that at about the age of
thirty-five years his mind was so much deranged that he was a fit
subject to be sent to an insane asylum; also that at different
times from that date during the next succeeding five years he
manifested such decided symptoms of insanity, without stimulation,
that many different persons conversing with him and observing his
conduct believed him to be insane; also that during the month of
June, 1881, at about the expiration of said term of five years, he
honestly became dominated by the idea that he was inspired of God
to remove by death the President of the United States; also that he
acted upon what he believed to be such inspiration, and what he
believed to be in accordance with the Divine will, in preparation
for and in the accomplishment of such purpose; also that he
committed the act of shooting the President under what he believed
to be a Divine command which he was not at liberty to disobey, and
which belief amounted to a conviction that controlled his
conscience and over-powered his will as to that act, so that he
could not resist the mental pressure upon him; also that
immediately after the shooting he appeared calm and as one relieved
by the performance of a great duty; also that there was no other
adequate motive for the act than the conviction that he was
executing the Divine will for the good of his country—assuming all
these propositions to be true, state whether in your opinion the
prisoner was sane or insane at the time of shooting President
Garfield?

															“A. Assuming those to be true, I should say the
prisoner was insane.” C. Rosenberg, The Trial of the Assassin
Guiteau 144–145 (1968) (Rosenberg).

															How likely is it that a jury hearing a question
like that would keep in mind that all the facts loaded into the
question were merely hypothetical and not necessarily supported by
the evidence in the case?

															The Guiteau example illustrates many other
problems with hypothetical questioning. For one, hypothetical
questions were “difficult for the attorneys to frame, for the court
to rule on, and for the jury to understand.” M. Ladd, Expert
Testimony, 5 Vand. L. Rev. 414, 425 (1952) (Ladd). Like the
question above, the hypotheticals were often “so built up and
contrived” that they were impossible for either the jury or the
expert to follow. 1 J. Wigmore, Evidence 1095 (2d ed. 1923) (1
Wigmore 2d); accord, Ladd 427. One case involved a hypothetical
that extended over “eighty-three pages of typewritten transcript,
and an objection involved in fourteen pages more of the record.”
Treadwell v. Nickel, 194 Cal. 243, 266, 228 P. 25, 35
(1924). Such questions required an expert to have the extraordinary
ability “to comprehend in one mental operation the entirety of what
has been asked so as to give any answer.” Ladd 427; see,
e.g., Editorials, The Hypothetical Question Again, 24 J.
Crim. L. & C. 517, 517–519 (1933). And juries surely found
following lengthy hypotheticals even more mystifying.

															For another, lawyers often used hypotheticals as
a preview of their closing arguments. See, e.g.,
Rosenberg 144 (“Assume . . . that he committed the act of
shooting the President under what he believed to be a Divine
command which he was not at liberty to disobey . . . so
that he could not resist the mental pressure upon him”); see also
S. Gross, Expert Evidence, 1991 Wis. L. Rev. 1113, 1162 (Gross);
Wigmore 2d §686, at 1095; Ladd 246. In doing so, they sometimes
sneaked in “irrelevant” information, Gross 1162, and excluded
necessary details, W. White, Insanity and the Criminal Law 86
(1923) (White) (describing the hypothetical question as
“eliminat[ing] from consideration every human element which every
common-sense man takes into consideration when he formulates an
opinion”). One medical expert declared that he “ha[d] never known a
hypothetical question, in a trial involving the mental condition of
the defendant, which in [his] opinion offered a fair presentation
of the case.” Ibid. As a result, experts either provided
answers that were entirely disconnected from “the actual case,” 1
Wigmore 2d §686, at 1095, or else they ignored the hypothetical
altogether, White 87.

															Because opposing counsel often disagreed for
strategic reasons about which facts should be included in a
hypothetical, constructing a hypothetical that the judge would
permit was often a tricky and contentious business. If counsel did
not include enough facts to satisfy opposing counsel, the
hypothetical would be met with an objection, and its sufficiency
would provide grist for an appeal. F. Rossi, Expert Witnesses 114
(1991). The threat of dragging out litigation led counsel to make
their hypotheticals even longer and more confusing.
Ibid.

															By the early-20th century, this form of
testimony was scorned. In the second edition of his treatise,
issued in 1923, Wigmore proclaimed the hypothetical question “that
feature which does most to disgust men of science with the law of
Evidence.” 1 Wigmore 2d §686, at 1094. Around the same time, Judge
Learned Hand labeled hypotheticals “the most horific and grotesque
wen upon the fair face of justice.” Address of L. Hand: The
Deficiencies of Trials to Reach the Heart of the Matter, in
Lectures on Legal Topics, 1921–1922, p. 104 (1926). Professor
Charles T. McCormick described hypotheticals as “an obstruction to
the administration of justice.” Some Observations Upon the Opinion
Rule and Expert Testimony, 23 Texas L. Rev. 109, 128 (1945)
(McCormick). Experts shared these concerns; one lamented that
lawyers’ use of hypothetical questions was often “so unfair and
confusing and degrading that it does not clarify the issue nor help
achieve justice.” H. Hulbert, Psychiatric Testimony in Probate
Proceedings, 2 Law & Contemp. Prob. 448, 455 (1935).
Eventually, the use of hypothetical questions was “nearly
universally recognized as a practical disaster” by lawyers, judges,
and witnesses alike. Kaye §4.4, at 189.

															This state of affairs sparked efforts to
eliminate hypothetical questions as a requirement. See,
e.g., 1 Wigmore 2d §686, at 1094 (“The Hypothetical
Question must go, as a requirement. Its abuses have become so
obstructive and nauseous that no remedy short of extirpation will
suffice” (emphasis deleted)). Change began first in the courts,
which allowed experts to sit through trial and then provide their
opinion “ ‘upon the evidence.’ ” 3 C. Chamberlayne,
Modern Law of Evidence §§2482, 2483, pp. 3343–3346 (1912).

															More formalized rule changes soon followed. In
1937, the Commissioners on Uniform State Laws incorporated a
provision in their Model Expert Testimony Act that permitted
experts to give their opinions without preliminarily disclosing
their underlying facts or data. Advisory Committee’s Notes to Fed.
Rule Evid. 705. In quick succession, both the Model Code of
Evidence, issued by the American Law Institute in 1942, and the
Uniform Rules of Evidence, approved by the American Bar Association
in 1953, recommended abandonment of hypothetical questions. See
ALI, Model Code of Evidence Rule 409, Comment b, p. 211 (the
hypothetical question “has been so grossly abused as to be almost a
scandal”); Uniform Rules of Evidence, Rule 58, Comment, p. 194
(“This rule does away with the necessity of following the practice
(grossly abused) of using the hypothetical question”). In 1972, the
Federal Rules of Evidence followed suit with Rules 703 and 705, and
many States made similar changes.

															B

															What replaced hypotheticals was the procedure
exemplified by the Federal Rules of Evidence.[1] Rule 703 provides that an expert’s opinion may
be based on “facts or data in the case that the expert has been
made aware of or personally observed.” And “[u]nless the court
orders otherwise,” Rule 705 permits the expert to “state an
opinion—and give the reasons for it—without first testifying to the
underlying facts or data.”

															These facts or data need not be “admissible” in
evidence, and they are not admitted for the truth of what they
assert. Fed. Rule Evid. 703. Instead, these facts or data
may, under some circumstances, be disclosed to the jury for
a limited purpose: to assist the jurors in judging the weight that
should be given to the expert’s opinion. Ibid. However, this
is not allowed unless the court determines that “their probative
value in helping the jury evaluate the [expert’s] opinion
substantially outweighs their prejudicial effect.” Ibid. And
to prevent the jury from improperly relying on basis testimony for
the truth of the matters it asserts, a judge must instruct
the jury upon request to consider such evidence only to assess the
quality of the expert’s testimony (i.e., to determine
whether an expert’s statements are reliable). See Advisory
Committee’s Notes on Fed. Rule Evid. 703, 28 U. S. C.
App., p. 393; Fed. Rule Evid. 105 (“If the court admits evidence
that is admissible . . . for a [limited] purpose—but not
. . . for another purpose—the court, on timely request,
must restrict the evidence to its proper scope and instruct the
jury accordingly”).

															This procedure is sensitive to the risk of
jurors’ mistakenly treating an expert’s basis testimony as evidence
of the truth of the facts of data upon which the expert relied. The
Rules provide important safeguards against this danger, such as the
stringent “probative value versus potential prejudice” test and the
requirement that a limiting instruction be given upon request.
Plus, of course, an expert’s lack of personal knowledge of the
“facts or data” that are called to his attention can be brought out
in cross examination and stressed in a closing argument.

															This modern system is more honest because it
reflects how experts actually form opinions. See Advisory
Committee’s Notes on Fed. Rule Evid. 703, at 393 (describing the
Rule as “designed to . . . bring the judicial practice in
line with the practice of the experts themselves when not in
court”). It is simpler and less likely to confuse. And it avoids
many of the pitfalls of the old procedure. It may not be
perfect—and evidence scholars have proposed a variety of
reforms—but it is unquestionably better than the old regime it
replaced.

															II

															In light of the woeful history of expert
testimony by hypotheticals, why has the Court disinterred that
procedural monstrosity? The Court reasons that “[i]f an expert for
the prosecution conveys an out-of-court statement in support of his
opinion, and the statement supports that opinion only if true, then
the statement has been offered for the truth of what it asserts.”
Ante, at 14. Or put differently, “the truth of the basis
testimony is what makes it useful to the prosecutor; that is what
supplies the predicate for—and thus gives value to—the state
expert’s opinion.” Ibid. In other words, the Court seems to
think that all basis testimony is necessarily offered for
its truth.

															This is just plain wrong. What makes basis
evidence “useful” is the assistance it gives the fact-finder in
judging the weight that should be given to the expert’s opinion.
See Advisory Committee’s Notes on Rule 703 (basis testimony may be
brought before a jury to help it “evaluate the . . .
opinion”). And a trial judge must, upon request, instruct the jury
to consider it only for that purpose. If a judge rules that basis
evidence is not admitted for its truth and so instructs the
jury, where does the Court discern a Confrontation Clause
problem?

															The only possible explanation is that the Court
believes that juries are incapable of following such an
instruction, but that conclusion is inconsistent with commonplace
trial practice and with a whole string of our decisions. It is a
routine matter for trial judges to instruct juries that evidence is
admitted for only a limited purpose. This Court acknowledged as
much in United States v. Abel, 469 U.S.
45 (1984), when it noted that “there is no rule of evidence
which provides that testimony admissible for one purpose and
inadmissible for another purpose is thereby rendered inadmissible;
quite the contrary is the case.” Id., at 56. In such
instances, courts use limiting instructions. See Fed. Rule Evid.
105; 1 R. Mosteller et al., McCormick on Evidence §59, pp.
481–483 (8th ed. 2020).

															And this Court has repeatedly upheld that
practice—even in “situations with potentially life-and-death stakes
for defendants” and even with respect to statements that are “some
of the most compelling evidence of guilt available to a jury,”
Samia v. United States, 599 U.S. 635, 646–647 (2023).
These decisions “credi[t] jurors by refusing to assume that they
are either ‘too ignorant to comprehend, or were too unmindful of
their duty to respect, instructions’ of the court.” Id., at
647. Indeed, we have described the assumption “ ‘that juries
will follow the instructions given them by the trial judge’ ”
as “ ‘crucial’ ” to “the system of trial by jury.”
Marshall v. Lonberger, 459 U.S.
422, 438, n. 6 (1983) (quoting Parker v.
Randolph, 442 U.S.
62, 73 (1979)); accord, Francis v. Franklin,
471 U.S.
307, 324–325, n. 9 (1985).

															A brief survey of prior decisions shows how
firmly this Court has adhered to that practice. In Harris v.
New York, 401 U.S.
222 (1971), the Court held that statements obtained from a
defendant in violation of Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U.S.
436 (1966), could be introduced to impeach that defendant’s
credibility, so long as the jury was instructed not to consider
them as evidence of his guilt. In Walder v. United
States, 347 U.S.
62 (1954), the Court affirmed the use of evidence obtained in
violation of the Fourth Amendment for impeachment when the trial
court had “carefully charged the jury” that it could not be
considered evidence of guilt. Id., at 64. In Spencer
v. Texas, 385 U.S.
554 (1967), the Court upheld the admission of evidence of the
defendant’s prior criminal convictions for the purpose of sentence
enhancement, provided that the jury was instructed that this
evidence could not be used in determining guilt. In Watkins
v. Sowders, 449 U.S.
341 (1981), the Court presumed that a jury could properly
evaluate an eyewitness identification “under the instructions of
the trial judge.” Id., at 347. And in Tennessee v.
Street, 471 U.S.
409 (1985), the Court approved the admission of an accomplice’s
incriminating confession given the “pointe[d] instruct[ions] [of]
the trial court ‘not to consider the truthfulness of [the
confession] in any way whatsoever.’ ” Id., at 414–415.

															Most recently in Samia, we held that a
limiting instruction was sufficient to defeat a Confrontation
Clause claim. In that homicide case, evidence showed that Samia had
traveled with his codefendant Stillwell to the Philippines to
commit a murder for hire. Samia, 599 U. S., at 640. The
trial court admitted Stillwell’s confession, which, as redacted,
stated that he was in a van with some “other person ” when
that person shot the victim, but the court told the jury that the
confession could be considered only for the purpose of determining
whether Stillwell himself was guilty. Id., at 642. Samia
argued that admitting the confession even with the limiting
instruction would inevitably prejudice him because “other evidence
and statements at trial enabled the jury to immediately infer that
the ‘other person’ described in the confession was Samia himself.”
 Ibid. Nevertheless, we presumed that the jury was able
to follow the limiting instruction, and we therefore affirmed
Samia’s murder conviction.

															Our cases have recognized only one situation in
which a limiting instruction is insufficient: where a defendant is
directly incriminated by the extrajudicial statements of a
non-testifying codefendant. Bruton v. United States,
391 U.S.
123 (1968). We have declined to extend that exception, see
Samia, 599 U. S., at 654, and the evidence in question
in Bruton cases is worlds away from an expert’s basis
testimony. If the Court thinks otherwise, it needs to explain why
basis testimony falls into the Bruton category and creates a
greater risk of juror confusion than all the other situations in
which the Court has assumed that jurors are capable of following
limiting instructions.

															III

															The Court’s assault on modern evidence law is
not only wrongheaded; it is totally unnecessary. Today’s decision
vacates the Arizona court’s judgment because the testifying
expert’s testimony was hearsay. I agree with that bottom line, but
not because of the majority’s novel theory that basis testimony is
always hearsay. Rather, I would vacate and remand because the
expert’s testimony is hearsay under any mainstream conception,
including that of the Federal Rules of Evidence.

															To understand why, begin with the facts. A state
forensic scientist, Elizabeth Rast, tested items seized from the
defendant and concluded that they were marijuana and
methamphetamine. Rast took notes of her tests, see App. to Pet. for
Cert. 88a–126a, and she signed a report confirming the results, see
id., at 85a–87a. At trial, Rast was unavailable, so the
prosecution called another forensic scientist, Greggory Longoni, to
provide his expert opinion about the testing, and Longoni relied on
Rast’s report in doing so.

															Under Rules 703 and 705, Longoni could have
offered his expert opinion that, based on the information in Rast’s
report and notes, the items she tested contained marijuana or
methamphetamine. In so answering, he would acknowledge that he
relied on Rast’s report and lab notes to reach his opinion. He
could have also disclosed the information in the report, if the
court found that the probative value of that information
substantially outweighed the risk of prejudice. See Fed. Rule Evid.
703. But he could not testify that any of the information in the
report was correct—for instance, that Rast actually performed the
tests she recorded or that she did so correctly. Nor could he
testify that the items she tested were the ones seized from Smith.
Longoni did not have personal knowledge of any of these facts, and
it is unclear what “reliable” scientific “methods” could lead him
to intuit their truth from Rast’s records. Fed. Rule Evid. 702(c)
(defining a permissible expert opinion).

															The strictures of the Federal Rules here track
the requirements of our Confrontation Clause precedents. If Longoni
testified to the truth of the fact that Rast actually performed the
tests indicated in her report and notes and that she carried out
those tests properly, he violated the Confrontation
Clause—assuming, of course, that the notes were “testimonial,” a
question that the Court does not reach. But he would also violate
the Federal Rules, which do not allow experts to testify to the
truth of inadmissible hearsay. In other words, except for the
question whether Rast’s report was “testimonial,” the Federal Rules
and the requirements of the Confrontation Clause are the same. This
case thus offers no occasion to blow up the Federal Rules.

															As it happens, I agree with the Court that
Longoni stepped over the line and at times testified to the truth
of the matter asserted. The prosecution asked Longoni on several
occasions to describe the tests that Rast performed or to swear to
their accuracy, and Longoni played along. He stated as fact that
Rast followed the lab’s “typical intake process” and that she
complied with the “policies and practices” of the lab. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 40a–42a. He also testified that Rast used certain
“scientific method[s]” to analyze the samples, such as performing
certain tests or running a “blank.” Id., at 41a–42a,
46a–48a. By asserting these facts as true, Longoni effectively
entered inadmissible hearsay into the record, thus implicating the
Confrontation Clause. The Court could have said that—and stopped
there.

															*  *  *

															For more than a half-century, the Federal Rules
of Evidence and similar state rules have reasonably allowed experts
to disclose the information underlying their opinion. Because the
Court places this form of testimony in constitutional doubt in many
cases, I concur only in the judgment.

Notes
1
 I refer to the Federal
Rules to illustrate the consequences of the Court’s opinion. The
witness in this case testified in an Arizona state court, and his
testimony was therefore governed by the relevant state rules, which
are virtually identical to the Federal Rules. Of course, the
Arizona courts are free to interpret those rules as they see fit,
and I do not address the question whether the witness’s testimony
was proper under Arizona law.


