::decision_cite:: 22-888
::decision_name::  Rudisill v. McDonough
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kavanaugh
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–888

															_________________

															JAMES R. RUDISILL, PETITIONER v. DENIS
R. McDONOUGH, SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the federal circuit

															[April 16, 2024]

															

															Justice Kavanaugh, with whom Justice Barrett
joins, concurring.

															I agree with the Court that the post-9/11
education-benefits law entitles James Rudisill, a military veteran,
to additional benefits for graduate school. The Court goes on to
say that the clarity of the benefits law at issue here means that
we need not rely on the veterans canon of statutory interpretation.
I again agree. I write separately, however, to note some practical
and constitutional questions about the justifications for a
benefits-related canon (such as the veterans canon) that favors one
particular group over others.

															Under the veterans canon, statutes that provide
benefits to veterans are to be construed “in the veteran’s favor.”
Brown v. Gardner, 513 U.S.
115, 118 (1994). The veterans canon is a substantive canon of
statutory interpretation. A substantive canon is a judicial
presumption in favor of or against a particular substantive
outcome. Some classic examples include the presumption against
retroactivity, the presumption against extraterritoriality, and the
presumption of mens rea.

															Applying a substantive canon, a court may depart
from what the court, absent the canon, would have concluded is the
best reading of the statutory text. Otherwise, of course, the
substantive canon would not be necessary or relevant. See J.
Manning & M. Stephenson, Legislation and Regulation 383 (4th
ed. 2021) (In “order for a substantive canon” to “do any work, it
must be the case that in the absence of the canon the court would
have reached a different conclusion”).

															Substantive canons are typically based on
background constitutional principles or long-settled judicial
understandings of congressional practice. See id., at
382–384. Because a substantive canon by definition has important
decision-altering effects, any substantive canon must be
sufficiently rooted in constitutional principles or congressional
practices.

															Here, no one suggests that the veterans canon
rests on background constitutional principles. Rather, the canon
seems to stem from a loose judicial assumption about congressional
intent—in particular, an assumption that Congress intends for
courts to read ambiguous veterans-benefits statutes more broadly
than the courts otherwise would read such statutes. See
Boone v. Lightner, 319 U.S.
561, 575 (1943).

															But what is that assumption based on? The Court
has never explained.

															The first glimmerings of the veterans canon
appeared in the 1940s. See ibid. But the early cases did not
purport to establish a canon. They seem to have simply engaged in
broadly purposive interpretation of the particular statutes at
issue. Since those early cases, the Court has occasionally referred
to a general pro-veterans interpretive principle, but without
further explanation. See, e.g., Henderson v.
Shinseki, 562 U.S.
428, 441 (2011); King v. St. Vincent’s Hospital,
502 U.S.
215, 220–221, n. 9 (1991). The canon appears to have
developed almost by accident.

															Moreover, the veterans canon has apparently not
mattered—in other words, has not affected the result—in any of this
Court’s past decisions in veterans cases, or in this case for that
matter. See, e.g., Henderson, 562 U. S., at 441;
Brown, 513 U. S., at 117–118; King, 502
U. S., at 220–221, n. 9; see also Kisor v.
McDonough, 995 F.3d 1347, 1350 (CA Fed. 2021) (Prost, C. J.,
concurring in denial of rehearing en banc). The Court has “rarely”
applied the veterans canon. Id., at 1350. And even when
mentioned, the canon has seemingly served only as the proverbial
icing on a cake already frosted—that is, an extra citation after
the Court has already concluded that the veteran prevails anyway
under the statutory text and traditional tools of statutory
interpretation.

															Despite the canon’s seemingly nonexistent impact
on this Court’s decisions, the Court’s reflexive repetition of the
canon over the years has created the appearance of deeper rooting,
leading lower courts—particularly the Federal Circuit where
veterans benefits cases are channeled—to rely on the canon in a way
that this Court has not. Compare id., at 1350–1358 with
id., at 1366–1374 (O’Malley, J., dissenting from denial of
rehearing en banc). But this Court’s repetition of the canon has
not yielded any greater justification or explanation by the Court
for applying such a canon in the first place.

															In considering whether a sufficient
justification exists, we must confront some fundamental problems
with benefits-related canons like this one.

															To begin with, the notion that benefits statutes
should be interpreted to favor a particular group creates
significant tension with the actual operation of the process by
which Congress and the President enact spending laws. To be sure,
if someone asked a Member of Congress or the President (or this
judge, for that matter) in the abstract, “Should veterans get more
benefits?” the answer would be yes. But that question is not (and
cannot be) answered in the abstract. The spending process is a
zero-sum game, where money spent on one group means less money for
other groups and other national priorities.

															Would Congress prefer to pay for another
semester of veterans’ graduate-school educations, or instead for
more Pell Grants for lower-income college students? Would Congress
want to spend more on healthcare benefits for the disabled, or
instead on prescription-drug benefits for senior citizens? Would
Congress choose to increase the pension benefits of retired CIA
agents, or instead the wages of soldiers who are serving in harm’s
way today? The list of difficult choices goes on and on. National
security, assistance to the poor, law enforcement, energy
production, environmental protection, border security, cancer
research, housing aid, highway construction, airplane safety,
school lunches, disaster relief, drug treatment, prisons, and a
plethora of other national priorities all compete for funding in
the legislative process. And the U. S. Treasury is not a bottomless
well of free money—rather, the money comes primarily from the taxes
paid by the American people.

															The spending process in Congress requires hard
choices with painful tradeoffs. Judges have no principled way to
make those choices or weigh those tradeoffs. Nor do judges have a
principled way, other than reading the statutory text as written,
to conclude that Congress and the President would prefer to favor
one group over another—or stated another way in this zero-sum
process, to disfavor one group over another.

															In addition to that practical problem, judges
have no constitutional authority to favor or disfavor one group
over another in the spending process. Rather, under the
Constitution’s separation of powers, Congress and the President
make those policy judgments. See U. S. Const., Art. I, §7, cl.
2; §8, cl. 1; §9, cl. 7. Courts must then neutrally interpret and
apply the spending laws enacted by Congress and the President.
Courts do so by heeding the statutory text and employing the
traditional tools of statutory interpretation—not by singling out
particular groups for favored or disfavored treatment. See A.
Scalia & B. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal
Texts 352–354 (2012).

															For those reasons, courts interpreting spending
laws usually do not apply canons to favor or disfavor particular
groups. Courts, for example, do not apply a low-income-families
canon, a healthcare-for-seniors canon, or a local-law-enforcement
canon to favor those groups. (Nor, from the other direction, do
courts apply a general fiscal-responsibility canon to narrowly
construe spending statutes.)

															In short, any canon that construes benefits
statutes in favor of a particular group—rather than just construing
the statutes as written—appears to be inconsistent both with actual
congressional practice on spending laws and with the Judiciary’s
proper constitutional role in the federal spending process.

															To be clear, Congress’s commitment to assisting
veterans through the many federal veterans-benefits programs is
entirely appropriate given the sacrifices made by those who have
served in the Armed Forces. The statutes that provide significant
veterans benefits—including healthcare, education, disability, and
retirement benefits—properly assist those who have defended
America. And when statutes afford broad benefits for veterans or
others, as is often the case, courts should apply the statutes as
written.

															But providing federal benefits—and determining
their scope—is Congress’s prerogative. The Judiciary’s role is to
neutrally interpret those statutes, not to put a thumb on the scale
in favor of or against any particular group. For that reason, it
may be important in a future case for this Court to address the
justification for any benefits-related canon that favors one group
over others.

													
