::decision_cite:: 22-807
::decision_name::  Alexander v. South Carolina State Conference of the NAACP
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22-807

															_________________

															THOMAS C. ALEXANDER, in his official capacity
as PRESIDENT OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA SENATE, et al., APPELLANTS
v. THE SOUTH CAROLINA STATE CONFERENCE OF THE NAACP, et
al.

															on appeal from the united states district
court for the district of south carolina

															[May 23, 2024]

															Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															I

															The Constitution entrusts state legislatures
with the primary responsibility for drawing congressional
districts, and redistricting is an inescapably political
enterprise. Legislators are almost always aware of the political
ramifications of the maps they adopt, and claims that a map is
unconstitutional because it was drawn to achieve a partisan end are
not justiciable in federal court. Thus, as far as the Federal
Constitution is concerned, a legislature may pursue partisan ends
when it engages in redistricting. By contrast, if a legislature
gives race a predominant role in redistricting decisions, the
resulting map is subjected to strict scrutiny and may be held
unconstitutional.

															These doctrinal lines collide when race and
partisan preference are highly correlated. We have navigated this
tension by endorsing two related propositions. First, a party
challenging a map's constitutionality must disentangle race and
politics if it wishes to prove that the legislature was motivated
by race as opposed to partisanship. Second, in assessing a
legislature's work, we start with a presumption that the
legislature acted in good faith.

															In this case, which features a challenge to
South Carolina's redistricting efforts in the wake of the 2020
census, the three-judge District Court paid only lip service to
these propositions. That misguided approach infected the District
Court's findings of fact, which were clearly erroneous under the
appropriate legal standard. We therefore reverse the trial court in
part and remand for further proceedings.

															II

															A

															Redistricting constitutes a traditional domain
of state legislative authority. See Moore v. Harper,
600 U.S. 1 (2023); see also U. S. Const., Art. I, §4, cl. 1. The
Fourteenth Amendment introduces one constraint by prohibiting a
State from engaging in a racial gerrymander unless it can satisfy
strict scrutiny. But given “the complex interplay of forces that
enter a legislature's redistricting calculus,” we have repeatedly
emphasized that federal courts must “exercise extraordinary caution
in adjudicating claims that a State has drawn district lines on the
basis of race.” Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S.
900, 915-916 (1995). Such caution is necessary because
“[f]ederal-court review of districting legislation represents a
serious intrusion on the most vital of local functions.”
Id., at 915. To untangle race from other permissible
considerations, we require the plaintiff to show that race was the
“predominant factor motivating the legislature's decision to place
a significant number of voters within or without a particular
district.” Id., at 916.

															To make that showing, a plaintiff must prove
that the State “subordinated” race-neutral districting criteria
such as compactness, contiguity, and core preservation to “racial
considerations.” Ibid. Racial considerations predominate
when “[r]ace was the criterion that, in the State's view, could not
be compromised” in the drawing of district lines.[1] Shaw v. Hunt, 517 U.S.
899, 907 (1996). We have recognized that, “[a]s a practical
matter,” challengers will often need to show that the State's
chosen map conflicts with traditional redistricting criteria.
Bethune-Hill v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections, 580
U.S. 178, 190 (2017). That is because it may otherwise “be
difficult for challengers to find other evidence sufficient to show
that race was the overriding factor causing neutral considerations
to be cast aside.” Ibid.

															This showing can be made through some
combination of direct and circumstantial evidence. See
Cooper v. Harris, 581 U.S. 285, 291 (2017). Direct
evidence often comes in the form of a relevant state actor's
express acknowledgment that race played a role in the drawing of
district lines. Such concessions are not uncommon because States
often admit to considering race for the purpose of satisfying our
precedent interpreting the Voting Rights Act of 1965. See, e.g.,
Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 575 U.S.
254, 259-260 (2015). Direct evidence can also be smoked out over
the course of litigation. In Cooper, for instance, we
offered the hypothetical example of a plaintiff finding “scores of
leaked e-mails from state officials instructing their mapmaker to
pack as many black voters as possible into a district.” 581 U. S.,
at 318. In such instances, if the State cannot satisfy strict
scrutiny, direct evidence of this sort amounts to a confession of
error.

															Proving racial predominance with circumstantial
evidence alone is much more difficult. Although we have never
invalidated an electoral map in a case in which the plaintiff
failed to adduce any direct evidence, we have, at least in theory,
kept the door open for those rare instances in which a district's
shape is “so bizarre on its face that it discloses a racial design”
absent any alternative explanation. Miller, 515 U. S., at
914; see also Shaw v. Reno, 509
U.S. 630, 643-645 (1993) (Shaw I ).

															A circumstantial-evidence-only case is
especially difficult when the State raises a
partisan-gerrymandering defense. That is because partisan and
racial gerrymanders “are capable of yielding similar oddities in a
district's boundaries” when there is a high correlation between
race and partisan preference. Cooper, 581 U. S., at 308. And
that is the situation in this case, as the 2020 Presidential
election illustrated. Exit polls found that at least 90% of black
voters voted for the Democratic candidate in South Carolina and
throughout the Nation.[2] When
partisanship and race correlate, it naturally follows that a map
that has been gerrymandered to achieve a partisan end can look very
similar to a racially gerrymandered map. For that reason, “[o]ur
prior decisions have made clear that a jurisdiction may engage in
constitutional political gerrymandering, even if it so happens that
the most loyal Democrats happen to be black Democrats and even if
the State were conscious of that fact.” Hunt v.
Cromartie, 526 U.S.
541, 551 (1999) (Cromartie I); see also Rucho v.
Common Cause, 588 U.S. 684, 721 (2019) (concluding that
federal judges lack the license to evaluate partisan-gerrymandering
claims). We have noted that a State's partisan-gerrymandering
defense therefore raises “special challenges” for plaintiffs.
Cooper, 581 U. S., at 308. To prevail, a plaintiff must
“disentangle race from politics” by proving “that the former
drove a district's lines.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
That means, among other things, ruling out the competing
explanation that political considerations dominated the
legislature's redistricting efforts. If either politics or race
could explain a district's contours, the plaintiff has not cleared
its bar.

															Our decision in Easley v.
Cromartie, 532 U.S.
234 (2001) (Cromartie II ), illustrates the difficulties
that plaintiffs must overcome in this context. There, the
plaintiffs' case hinged on circumstantial evidence of a racial
gerrymander such as expert testimony and discrepancies between the
relevant district lines and traditional districting criteria.
Id., at 240-241; see also Cooper, 581 U. S., at 321
(describing the direct evidence in Cromartie II as
“extremely weak”). After the State asserted a
partisan-gerrymandering defense, we faulted the plaintiffs for
failing to show “that the legislature could have achieved its
legitimate political objectives in alternative ways that are
comparably consistent with traditional districting principles.”
Cromartie II, 532 U. S., at 258. In other words, the
plaintiffs failed to meet the high bar for a racial-gerrymandering
claim by failing to produce, among other things, an alternative map
showing that a rational legislature sincerely driven by its
professed partisan goals would have drawn a different map with
greater racial balance. Since our decision in Cromartie II,
any plaintiff with a strong case has had every incentive to produce
such an alternative map.

															Without an alternative map, it is difficult for
plaintiffs to defeat our starting presumption that the legislature
acted in good faith. This presumption of legislative good faith
directs district courts to draw the inference that cuts in the
legislature's favor when confronted with evidence that could
plausibly support multiple conclusions. See, e.g., Abbott v.
Perez, 585 U.S. 579, 610-612 (2018). This approach ensures
that “race for its own sake, and not other districting principles,
was the legislature's dominant and controlling rationale in drawing
its district lines.” Miller, 515 U. S., at 913; see also
Cromartie I, 526 U. S., at 546 (noting that strict scrutiny
is warranted when a map is “unexplainable on grounds other than
race” (internal quotation marks omitted)).

															Three additional reasons justify this
presumption. First, this presumption reflects the Federal
Judiciary's due respect for the judgment of state legislators, who
are similarly bound by an oath to follow the Constitution. Second,
when a federal court finds that race drove a legislature's
districting decisions, it is declaring that the legislature engaged
in “offensive and demeaning” conduct, Miller, 515 U. S., at
912, that “bears an uncomfortable resemblance to political
apartheid,” Shaw I, 509 U. S., at 647. We should not be
quick to hurl such accusations at the political branches. Third, we
must be wary of plaintiffs who seek to transform federal courts
into “weapons of political warfare” that will deliver victories
that eluded them “in the political arena.” Cooper, 581 U.
S., at 335 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part). The presumption of good faith furthers each of
these constitutional interests. It also explains why we have held
that the plaintiff 's evidentiary burden in these cases is
especially stringent. See Cromartie II, 532 U. S., at
241.

															If a plaintiff can demonstrate that race drove
the mapping of district lines, then the burden shifts to the State
to prove that the map can overcome the daunting requirements of
strict scrutiny. Under this standard, we begin by asking whether
the State's decision to sort voters on the basis of race furthers a
compelling governmental interest. Cooper, 581 U. S., at 292.
We then determine whether the State's use of race is “narrowly
tailored”—i.e., “necessary”—to achieve that interest. This
standard is extraordinarily onerous because the Fourteenth
Amendment was designed to eradicate race-based state action.
Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and
Fellows of Harvard College, 600 U.S. 181, 206 (2023).

															B

															South Carolina has seven congressional
districts, and this case concerns two of them, Districts 1 and 6.
District 1 covers the State's southeast region, while District 6
covers its southwest and central regions. South Carolina's prior
map, which was enacted in 2011, split several counties between
Districts 1 and 6, including Beaufort, Berkeley, Charleston,
Colleton, and Dorchester Counties. See Figure 1, infra, at
11. The Department of Justice precleared the 2011 map, and a
three-judge District Court upheld it against racial-gerrymandering
and intentional vote-dilution claims after finding that the
legislature “demonstrate[d] that [it] adhered to traditional
race-neutral principles.” Backus v. South Carolina,
857 F. Supp. 2d 553, 560 (SC), summarily aff 'd, 568 U.S. 801
(2012). The relevant part of that map is shown in Figure 1,
infra, at 11.

															Over the next decade, the 2011 map consistently
yielded a 6-to-1 Republican-Democratic delegation—with one
exception. In 2018, the Democratic candidate, with 50.7% of the
votes, narrowly won District 1, which had previously elected
Republican candidates.[3] But
in 2020, when the Republican Presidential candidate handily won the
State, the Republican congressional candidate retook District 1 by
a slender margin, winning 50.6% of the votes.[4]

															South Carolina had to redraw its map after the
2020 census because two of the State's seven districts saw major
population shifts. District 1 was overpopulated by 87,689 residents
while District 6 was underpopulated by 84,741 residents. South
Carolina therefore had to add voters to District 6 while
subtracting voters from District 1 in order to comply with the
principle of one person, one vote. The remaining districts also had
to be modified in order to bring the whole map into compliance with
that requirement.

															In September 2021, the Senate subcommittee
tasked with drawing the new map issued guidance explaining that
traditional districting principles, such as respect for contiguity
and incumbent protection, would guide the mapmaking process along
with the strict equal-population requirement. At the same time, the
Republican-controlled legislature also made it clear that it would
aim to create a stronger Republican tilt in District 1. Senate
Majority Leader Shane Massey, for instance, testified at trial that
partisanship was “one of the most important factors” in the process
and that the Republican Party was “not going to pass a plan that
sacrificed [District 1].” J. S. A. 265a. As he put it, the
legislature's adoption of any map that improved the Democrats'
chance of reclaiming District 1 would constitute “political
malpractice.” Id., at 276a. Contemporaneous evidence
confirms that leaders in the legislature sought to “create a
stronger Republican tilt” in District 1 while “honoring” other
race-neutral, traditional districting criteria. 649 F. Supp. 3d
177, 187 (SC 2023); J. S. A. 333a-334a.

															To draw its maps, the Senate turned to Will
Roberts, a nonpartisan staffer with 20 years of experience in state
government. Roberts had “worked with the three-judge panel in
Backus” and had routinely prepared “reapportionment plans
for counties, cities[,] and school boards across the state.” 649 F.
Supp. 3d, at 188. During the trial of this case, one of the judges
praised Roberts' expertise and honesty on the record.[5] Under the Senate's open-door policy,
Roberts drew maps upon request for Republican and Democratic
Senators alike. In making these maps, Roberts relied on political
data from the 2020 Presidential election along with traditional
districting criteria and input from various lawmakers, including
Representative Jim Clyburn, whose recommendations would have
preserved the strong Democratic tilt in his district (District 6)
and included a version of District 1 with a black voting-age
population (BVAP) of 15.48%. J. S. A. 127a.

															The eventual map (Enacted Plan), see Figure 2,
infra, at 12, differed from the 2011 map in three important
respects that reflected the legislature's priorities. First, the
Enacted Plan unified Beaufort and Berkeley Counties within District
1. This move enhanced the Republican advantage in District 1
because the moved-in portions of those counties leaned Republican.
Second, to further increase the Republican lead in District 1,
Roberts also put more of Dorchester County in District 1. These
changes exacerbated the population imbalance between District 1 and
District 6. Third, to cure this problem, Roberts moved a series of
precincts in Charleston from District 1 to District 6. In keeping
with the legislature's partisan objectives, the precincts moved out
of District 1 had a 58.8% Democratic vote share.

															By design, the legislature divided Charleston
between Districts 1 and 6. This split was seen as in Charleston's
best interests because it meant that the county would have two
Representatives in the House—one Democrat, Representative Clyburn,
who has represented District 6 since 1993 and has held important
House leadership positions, and one Republican representing
District 1. Republican Senator Chip Campsen, who spearheaded the
mapmaking process, testified that Charleston benefits from
bipartisan congressional representation on “bread-and-butter
things” like port maintenance and “influence with the incumbent
administration.” Id., at 338a. As he explained, “I am
tickled to death that Jim Clyburn represents Charleston County,”
id., at 371a, because “Clyburn has more influence with the
Biden Administration perhaps than anyone in the nation,”
id., at 338a. To achieve all these objectives, Roberts moved
roughly 193,000 residents between the districts with a net
migration of 87,690 people into District 6. Id., at 439a,
443a.

															The Enacted Map achieved the legislature's
political goal by increasing District 1's projected Republican vote
share by 1.36% to 54.39%. The version of District 1 in the Enacted
Plan also had a slightly higher BVAP, rising from 16.56% to 16.72%.
The legislature voted to adopt the Enacted Plan, and the Governor
signed it into law in January 2022.

															While the Enacted Map was still in the making,
the plaintiff-appellees in this case—the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and Taiwan Scott, a voter
in District 1 (collectively, the Challengers)—sued to contest the
2011 map on the ground that, in light of the 2020 census, it
violated the one person, one vote requirement. After South Carolina
passed the Enacted Plan, the Challengers amended their complaint to
attack that map instead. The Challengers alleged that Districts 1,
2, and 5 were racially gerrymandered and that these districts
diluted the electoral power of the State's black voters. A
three-judge District Court rejected these claims with respect to
Districts 2 and 5. But the court held that South Carolina drew
District 1 with a 17% BVAP “target” in mind and that this violated
the Equal Protection Clause. For similar reasons, the court also
found that the State's putative use of race to draw District 1
unlawfully diluted the black vote. The court permanently enjoined
South Carolina from conducting elections in District 1 until it
approved a new map. The State appealed to this Court, and we noted
probable jurisdiction. 598 U. S. ___ (2023).

															

															

															

															

															III

															The State contends that the District Court
committed both legal error and clear factual error in concluding
that race played a predominant role in the legislature's design of
District 1. The State's principal legal argument is that the
District Court did not properly disentangle race from politics.
Because this argument, at bottom, attacks the factual basis of the
District Court's findings, we dispose of this case on clear-error
grounds.

															Under our case law, the Challengers bore the
burden of showing that the “legislature subordinated traditional
race-neutral districting principles . . . to racial
considerations.” Miller, 515 U. S., at 916. In this case,
the District Court clearly erred because the Challengers did not
meet this “demanding” standard. Id., at 928 (O'Connor, J.,
concurring). They provided no direct evidence of a racial
gerrymander, and their circumstantial evidence is very weak.
Instead, the Challengers relied on deeply flawed expert reports.
And while these experts produced tens of thousands of maps with
differently configured districts, they did not offer a single map
that achieved the legislature's partisan goal while including a
higher BVAP in District 1. Faced with this record, we must reverse
the District Court on the racial-gerrymandering claim.

															We divide our analysis into four parts. First,
we set out the appropriate legal standard for reviewing a district
court's factual findings in racial-gerrymandering cases. Second, we
explain why the District Court's factual findings are clearly
flawed with respect to the Challengers' circumstantial evidence.
Third, we examine the four expert reports that the Challengers
presented below. And finally, we explain that the District Court
erred by not drawing an adverse inference from the Challengers'
failure to submit an alternative map that would have allowed the
State to achieve its districting goals while maintaining a higher
BVAP in District 1.

															A

															We review the District Court's factual
findings for clear error. That means we may not set those findings
aside unless, after examining the entire record, we are “left with
the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been
committed.” Cooper, 581 U. S., at 309 (internal quotation
marks omitted). This is a demanding test, but it is not a rubber
stamp.

															Moreover, in a case like this, there is a
special danger that a misunderstanding of what the law requires may
infect what is labeled a finding of fact. “[I]f [a] trial court
bases its findings upon a mistaken impression of applicable legal
principles, the reviewing court is not bound by the clearly
erroneous standard.” Inwood Laboratories, Inc. v. Ives
Laboratories, Inc., 456 U.S.
844, 855, n. 15 (1982); see also Abbott, 585 U. S., at
607. Here, the standard of proof that the three-judge court was
required to apply, i.e., the racial-predominance test, has a
very substantial legal component that must take account of our
prior relevant decisions.[6]
And the application of this test calls for particular care when the
defense contends that the driving force in its critical districting
decisions (namely, partisanship) was a factor that is closely
correlated with race. Thus, in a case like this, we must exercise
special care in reviewing the relevant findings of fact.

															B

															The District Court found that South Carolina
drew District 1 with a racial “target,” namely, the maintenance of
a 17% BVAP, and it concluded that this deliberate use of race
rendered District 1's lines unlawful. See Bethune-Hill, 580
U. S., at 183-185. But the Challengers did not offer any direct
evidence to support that conclusion, and indeed, the direct
evidence that is in the record is to the contrary. Roberts, the
non-partisan career employee who drew the Enacted Map, testified
that he used only political data, and his colleagues likewise
steadfastly denied using race in drawing the Enacted Map. None of
the facts on which the District Court relied to infer a racial
motive is sufficient to support an inference that can overcome the
presumption of legislative good faith.

															First, the District Court inferred a
racial motive from the fact that District 1's BVAP stayed around
17% “[d]espite all of th[e] changes” that South Carolina made
during the redistricting process. 649 F. Supp. 3d, at 191. But
where race and partisan preferences are very closely tied, as they
are here, the mere fact that District 1's BVAP stayed more or less
constant proves very little. If 100% of black voters voted for
Democratic candidates, it is obvious that any map with the partisan
breakdown that the legislature sought in District 1—something in
the range of 54% Republican to 46% Democratic—would inevitably
involve the removal of a disproportionate number of black voters.
And since roughly 90% of black voters cast their ballots for
Democratic candidates, the same phenomenon is very likely.

															The District Court's own findings substantiate
the tight correlation between the legislature's partisan aim and
District 1's BVAP. During the redistricting process, the State
considered a variety of maps, including those submitted by the
Challengers. Maps with a Democratic-leaning District 1 had BVAP
percentages that generally ranged between 21% to 24%. See App. 83;
J. S. A. Supp. 142a. The District Court itself concluded that a 17%
BVAP “produced a Republican tilt,” a 20% BVAP “produced a ‘toss up
district,' ” and a 21% to 24% BVAP “produced a Democratic tilt.”
649 F. Supp. 3d, at 188. And the Challengers cannot point to even
one map in the record that would have satisfied the legislature's
political aim and had a BVAP above 17%. Thus, there is strong
evidence that the district's BVAP of 17% was simply a side effect
of the legislature's partisan goal. And certainly nothing rules out
that possibility. In light of the presumption of legislative good
faith, that possibility is dispositive.

															The District Court's reasoning, however, is
flatly inconsistent with that presumption. And what the court
did—inferring bad faith based on the racial effects of a political
gerrymander in a jurisdiction in which race and partisan preference
are very closely correlated—would, if accepted, provide a
convenient way for future litigants and lower courts to sidestep
our holding in Rucho that partisan- gerrymandering claims
are not justiciable in federal court. Under the District Court's
reasoning, a litigant could repackage a partisan-gerrymandering
claim as a racial- gerrymandering claim by exploiting the tight
link between race and political preference. Instead of claiming
that a State impermissibly set a target Republican-Democratic
breakdown, a plaintiff could simply reverse-engineer the partisan
data into racial data and argue that the State impermissibly set a
particular BVAP target. Our decisions cannot be evaded with such
ease. For that reason, the District Court clearly erred in finding
that the legislature deliberately sought to maintain a particular
BVAP just because the maps that produced the sought-after partisan
goal all had roughly the same BVAP.

															Second, the District Court inferred a
racial motive from certain changes that the State made in redrawing
District 1, namely, the Enacted Plan moved more voters out of
District 1 (approximately 140,000) than were needed to comply with
the one person, one vote rule (about 88,000), and the Enacted Plan
split Charleston and a few other counties even though the avoidance
of such splits is a traditional redistricting objective. But here,
again, the State's avowed partisan objective easily explains these
facts. The State claims it sought to ensure that District 1 had a
reliable Republican majority, and simply removing 88,000 voters
without regard to their party preferences would not have satisfied
that objective. Similarly, the high priority that the legislature
gave to its partisan goal provides an entirely reasonable
explanation for the subordination of other objectives such as the
avoidance of county splits. See Cooper, 581 U. S., at 308
(“[P]olitical and racial [gerrymanders] are capable of yielding
similar oddities in a district's boundaries”).

															Third, the District Court found it
telling that many predominantly black Charleston precincts were
moved out of District 1 and into District 6. But because of the
tight correlation between race and partisan preferences, this fact
does little to show that race, not politics, drove the
legislature's choice. The Charleston County precincts that were
removed are 58.8% Democratic. Thus, the legislature's stated
partisan goal can easily explain this decision, and the District
Court therefore erred in crediting the less charitable conclusion
that the legislature's real aim was racial.

															Fourth, the District Court placed too
much weight on the fact that several legislative staffers,
including Roberts, viewed racial data at some point during the
redistricting process. This acknowledgment means little on its own
because we expect that “[r]edistricting legislatures will . . .
almost always be aware of racial demographics.” Miller, 515
U. S., at 916. Here, Roberts testified without contradiction that
he considered the relevant racial data only after he had
drawn the Enacted Map and that he generated that data solely for a
lawful purpose, namely, to check that the maps he produced complied
with our Voting Rights Act precedent. J. S. A. 92a, 205a, 379a.

															The District Court discredited this testimony,
but it cited no evidence that could not also support the inference
that politics drove the mapmaking process. And the court provided
no explanation why a mapmaker who wanted to produce a version of
District 1 that would be safely Republican would use data about
voters' race rather than their political preferences. Why would
Roberts have used racial data—with the associated legal risks—as a
proxy for partisan data when he had access to refined,
sub-precinct-level political data that accounted for voter turnout
and electoral preferences? The District Court provided no answer to
this obvious question.[7]

															The Challengers look to plug this gap by arguing
that Roberts must have used racial data because the political data
he claimed to have used was blatantly unsatisfactory. For support,
they cite the testimony of Dale Oldham, a political consultant who
did not participate in drawing the Enacted Plan. Oldham testified
that he believed the standard data South Carolina used for
measuring partisanship is unreliable because it does not accurately
reflect the partisan preferences of absentee voters. Oldham opined
that a new type of composite data that first became available in
2020 does a better job in that regard. J. S. A. Supp. 417a-418a,
420a.

															This criticism is entitled to little weight. One
consultant's opinion about the quality of South Carolina's
political data obviously does not settle the question whether the
State's political data was inferior. And in any event, the relevant
question is not whether the State used the best available data but
whether it is reasonable to infer that the mapmakers' political
data was so obviously flawed that they must have surreptitiously
used racial data. Oldham's testimony falls far short of
establishing that the State cannot plausibly have believed that its
own political data was sufficient. Nothing in our case law requires
the State to adopt novel methodologies in analyzing election data.
Indeed, the State plausibly argues that its data was more than good
enough for its purposes because it showed partisan preferences at
the sub-precinct level and also accounted for variations in voter
turnout. Reply Brief 9, 11; J. S. A. 93a.

															In sum, the District Court's heavy reliance on
these four pieces of evidence was seriously misguided in light of
the appropriate legal standard and our repeated instructions that a
court in a case such as this must rule out the possibility that
politics drove the districting process.

															C

															Once these weak inferences are set aside, all
that the Challengers have left are four expert reports. But these
reports are flawed because they “ignored certain traditional
districting criteria” such as geographical constraints and the
legislature's partisan interests. Allen v. Milligan,
599 U.S. 1, 34 (2023). Because these reports do not replicate the
“myriad considerations” that a legislature must balance as part of
its redistricting efforts, they cannot sustain a finding that race
played a predominant role in the drawing of District 1's lines.
Id., at 35. We will discuss each of the Challengers' four
experts in turn.

															Dr. Kosuke Imai. The report of the
Challengers' first expert, Dr. Kosuke Imai, provides no support for
the decision below because Dr. Imai made no effort to disentangle
race from politics. Dr. Imai developed a computer algorithm that
generated 20,000 maps of the State's congressional districts that
complied with the one person, one vote rule. This algorithm did not
take race into account, and it sought to respect traditional
redistricting objectives such as contiguity and compactness. The
Challengers assert that these maps prove that race drove the
State's redistricting process because the average District 1 in
these simulations contained a higher BVAP than the District 1 in
the Enacted Plan.

															The Challengers' inference is flawed because Dr.
Imai's models failed to consider partisanship. See J. S. A. Supp.
30a (acknowledging that “no race or partisan information was
used” (emphasis added)). That is a fatal omission in this case. As
noted, race and politics strongly correlate in South Carolina, and
Dr. Imai's algorithm produced maps without requiring that District
1 comply with the legislature's asserted aim of ensuring that
District 1 remain a relatively safe Republican seat. The effect of
Dr. Imai's omission can be seen by looking at the Democratic vote
share (measured by the results in the 2020 Presidential election)
in the versions of District 1 that his simulations produced.
President Biden's vote share in the average District 1 in Dr.
Imai's maps was significantly higher than his vote share in the
version of District 1 in the Enacted Plan. Rebuttal Report of Sean
Trende in South Carolina State Conference of the NAACP v.
McMaster, No. 3:21-cv-3302 (D SC, Aug. 19, 2022), ECF Doc.
323-33, pp. 5-6. Indeed, Dr. Sean Trende, the State's expert,
showed that District 1 would have voted for the Democratic nominee
in 2020 in 91% of Dr. Imai's simulations. Ibid. Because Dr.
Imai's model fails to track the considerations that governed the
legislature's redistricting decision, it is irrelevant that the
racial makeup of District 1 in his maps differs from that in the
version of the district in the Enacted Plan.

															It is also noteworthy that Dr. Imai could have
easily controlled for partisan preferences just as he controlled
for other redistricting factors such as compactness and county
splits. He could have generated maps conditioned on District 1's
vote share matching or exceeding the Benchmark Plan's Republican
tilt. But he did not take that obvious step.

															The Challengers seek to excuse their failures to
disentangle race and politics by arguing that South Carolina raised
a partisan-gerrymandering defense for the first time during the
trial, but this argument rests on the implausible premise that the
Challengers were unaware of the legislature's partisan concerns
during the mapmaking process. The fact of the matter is that
politics pervaded the highly visible mapmaking process from start
to finish. The Republican and Democratic caucuses submitted
competing maps, and the Enacted Plan passed the legislature by a
margin of 26 to 15 in the Senate and 72 to 33 in the House, with
only Democrats voting in opposition. The public hearings and
legislative debates are of a piece. For example, Senator Margie
Bright Matthews, a black Democrat, said in a floor debate with
Senator Campsen that “ ‘we're not going to get into the racial
gerrymandering thing because you and I both know in Charleston it
matters not about your race. It is just that you went by how those
folks voted.' ” App. 296. For evidence, she recognized that the
Enacted Plan also moved into District 6 predominantly white parts
of Charleston that skewed Democratic, such as West Ashley. She
added, “ ‘Senator [Campsen], . . . I really appreciate you agreeing
with me that our opposition . . . is not about racial
[gerrymandering].' ” Ibid. Instead, she said, it was about “
‘packing' ” the Democratic-voting area of Charleston into District
6 “ ‘to make [District 1] more electable.' ” Ibid. Former
Congressman Cunningham, the Democrat who represented District 1
from 2018 to 2020, also criticized the Enacted Plan's District 1
lines as “ ‘mak[ing] no sense unless, of course, the sole
purpose . . . is to make it harder for a Republican to lose.' ”
Id., at 295. He added that “the folks in Washington, D.C.,”
did not want a repeat of the 2018 election or even the 2020
election where he lost against the Republican nominee by “a single
point in one of the closest elections in the entire country.”
Ibid. Under these circumstances, it is safe to say that the
Challengers were on notice that the State would raise a
partisan-gerrymandering defense at trial.

															Dr. Imai's conspicuous failure to control for
party preference is alone sufficient to discredit any reliance on
his report, but his report exhibited another serious flaw: it
failed to consider “core district retention,” a term that “refers
to the proportion of districts that remain when a State transitions
from one districting plan to another.” Allen, 599 U. S., at
21. The Enacted Plan retains 83% of District 1's core, but the
average map produced by Dr. Imai's model scored 69% on the
core-district-retention metric—three standard deviations lower. ECF
Doc. 323-33, at 5.

															Dr. Imai's failure to consider core retention
betrays a blinkered view of the redistricting process. Lawmakers do
not typically start with a blank slate; rather, they usually begin
with the existing map and make alterations to fit various
districting goals. Core retention recognizes this reality. Dr. Imai
could have controlled for this metric by restricting the core
retention in his simulations to at least 83%. His failure to do so
here means we cannot rule out core retention as another plausible
explanation for the difference between the Enacted Plan and the
average Imai simulation.

															Dr. Jordan Ragusa. As evidence that race
predominated in District 1's design, the District Court also
credited a report by Dr. Jordan Ragusa, another expert for the
Challengers. Unlike Dr. Imai, Dr. Ragusa attempted to disentangle
race from politics, but as we will explain, his analysis has at
least two serious defects. First, he failed to account for two key
mapmaking factors: contiguity and compactness. Second, he used an
inferior method of measuring a precinct's partisan leanings.

															We begin with the matter of contiguity and
compactness. Dr. Ragusa used three separate models, but none of
them controlled for these critical districting factors. Two of his
models employed the so-called county envelope approach. Using this
approach, he first identified the five counties that have at least
one precinct that fell within District 1 in the Benchmark Plan.
These counties in their entirety constituted the “county
envelope.”

															Dr. Ragusa employed a method that we will
discuss below to control for the partisan preferences of voters in
these precincts, and he also controlled for precinct size. He then
asked whether a precinct of a given size with a given partisan
breakdown was more or less likely to be included in District 1
depending on its racial demographics, and he reported that
districts with a high percentage of black voters were more likely
to be excluded.

															His remaining model looked only at the precincts
that were in District 1 in the Benchmark Plan, and controlling in
the same way for size and partisan leaning, he reported that a
precinct was more likely to be moved out if it had a high
percentage of black voters.

															All three of these models exhibit the same flaw.
Because they did not control for contiguity or compactness, they
all assume that a precinct could be moved into or out of District 1
regardless of its distance from the line between that district and
District 6. That is highly unrealistic. A simple example
illustrates this point in relation to the county envelope approach,
as can be seen with a quick look at Figure 1, which we again
reproduce below.

															

															

															

															Under Dr. Ragusa's methodology, any
precinct in Colleton County could have been moved into District
1, but many precincts in that county are nowhere near District 1's
outer boundaries. For example, precincts near the county's northern
border with Bamberg County could not have been moved into District
1 without egregiously flouting the State's important interests in
contiguity or compactness. And the same problem arises with respect
to the question whether a precinct in District 1 in the Benchmark
Plan could have been moved into District 6. Precincts in District 1
that are not close to the district line could not have been moved
without making District 6 less contiguous or compact.[8]

															We have already rejected a plaintiff 's expert
report for failing to account for this feature of mapmaking. In
Cromartie II, we faulted the plaintiff 's expert for failing
to consider whether the excluded precincts “were located near
enough to [the district's] boundaries or each other for the
legislature as a practical matter to have drawn [the district's]
boundaries to have included them, without sacrificing other
important political goals.” 532 U. S., at 247. The District Court
clearly erred in crediting Dr. Ragusa's models because his approach
made that same mistake.

															Dr. Ragusa's report also carries less weight
because of how he measured a precinct's partisan leanings. Using
the results of the 2020 Presidential election, Dr. Ragusa measured
partisan tilt by looking at the total votes cast for
President Biden, not the net votes for President Biden. This
method fails to account for the fact that voter turnout may vary
significantly from precinct to precinct, and therefore a precinct
in which a candidate gets a large number of votes may also be a
precinct in which the candidate fails to win a majority. To
illustrate this point, consider this simplified example:

															

															

															

															

															

															

															Dr. Ragusa's model considers only the total
number of Biden votes in its partisanship analysis. J. S. A. 502a.
But legislators aiming to make District 1 a relatively safe
Republican seat would be foolish to exclude Precinct 2 merely
because it has more Democratic votes than Precinct 1. Instead, they
would look at the net Democratic votes and would thus remove
Precinct 1, not Precinct 2. Although the use of total votes may be
a statistically permissible measure of partisan lean, it is
undoubtedly preferable for an expert report to rely on net votes
when measuring a district's partisan lean.

															The Challengers seek to defend Dr. Ragusa's
report by suggesting that he followed the same methodology as
Professor Stephen Ansolabehere, whose report we blessed in
Cooper, 581 U. S., at 315, but that is wrong. There are
important differences between Dr. Ragusa's methodology and
Professor Ansolabehere's,[9]
and in all events, Professor Ansolabehere's report played a minor
role in Cooper, where the plaintiffs could also point to
direct evidence. Here, by contrast, once the District Court's other
circumstantial findings are set aside, the Challengers must rest
their entire case on these expert reports. Dr. Ragusa's report, on
its own, cannot prove that District 1's lines are “unexplainable on
grounds other than race.” Shaw I, 509 U. S., at 644
(internal quotation marks omitted).

															Dr. Baodong Liu. Dr. Baodong Liu, another
of the Challengers' experts, submitted a report that purported to
show that race rather than politics explains District 1's design.
Although the District Court did not cite Dr. Liu's report, the
Challengers contend that it bolsters the District Court's findings.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 86-87. But Dr. Liu's methodology was plainly
flawed.

															First, his methodology, like Dr. Ragusa's,
failed to account for contiguity and compactness. Dr. Liu examined
all voters living within the county envelope for District 1 of the
Enacted Plan to see which voters were more likely to have been
excluded. His analysis suggested that black Democrats were more
likely to have been excluded than white Democrats.

															This methodology was highly unrealistic because
it treated each voter as an independent unit that South Carolina
could include or exclude from District 1. No mapmaker who respects
contiguity and compactness could take such an approach. For
example, a mapmaker could not assign a black Republican to one
district while moving a black Democrat who lives in the same
apartment building to another district. To accurately reflect the
districting process, an analysis would have to pay attention to
whether a voter's neighbors were moved too.

															This defect alone is sufficient to preclude
reliance on Dr. Liu's report, but that report exhibited another
flaw: it used inferior data to measure a district's partisan tilt.
While the State used voting data from the 2020 Presidential
election, Dr. Liu relied on data from the 2018 gubernatorial
primaries. Data from that gubernatorial primary is less
informative because far fewer voters turn out for off-cycle
gubernatorial primary elections. The numbers prove the point. In
the 2018 elections, a total of about 610,000 votes were cast across
both primaries; in the 2020 Presidential election, by contrast, a
total of 2.5 million votes were cast.[10] Because Dr. Liu examined only a small, highly
non-random sample of the regular voting electorate, we cannot say
that the same results would hold true if he had applied his
methodology to the State's 2020 data.

															Dr. Moon Duchin. Dr. Moon Duchin, the
final expert put forward by the Challengers, provided a report
assessing whether the Enacted Plan “cracks” black voters among
multiple districts in a way that produced “discernible vote
dilution.” J. S. A. Supp. 127a. After finding that the Enacted Plan
diluted the black vote, Dr. Duchin concluded that it is “not
plausible” that the dilution was a mere “side effect of partisan
concerns.” Id., at 175a.

															Neither the District Court nor the Challengers
cite Dr. Duchin's report to support the racial-predominance
finding, and that is for a good reason. Like Dr. Imai's report,
various parts of Dr. Duchin's report did not account for
partisanship or core retention. App. 102-103. Moreover, Dr.
Duchin's conclusion was based on an assessment of the map as a
whole rather than District 1 in particular. A state-wide analysis
cannot show that District 1 was drawn based on race. See
Bethune-Hill, 580 U. S., at 191 (“[T]he basic unit of
analysis for racial gerrymandering claims . . . is the district”);
Alabama Legislative Black Caucus, 575 U. S., at 262-263 (a
racial-gerrymandering claim “does not apply to a State considered
as an undifferentiated ‘whole' ”). Given these serious problems, it
is no wonder that the challengers cite Dr. Duchin's report only in
support of their racial vote-dilution claim. It has no probative
force with respect to their racial-gerrymandering claim regarding
District 1's boundaries.

															To sum up our analysis so far, no direct
evidence supports the District Court's finding that race
predominated in the design of District 1 in the Enacted Plan. The
circumstantial evidence falls far short of showing that race, not
partisan preferences, drove the districting process, and none of
the expert reports offered by the Challengers provides any
significant support for their position. [11]

															D

															In addition to all this, the District Court
also critically erred by failing to draw an adverse inference
against the Challengers for not providing a substitute map that
shows how the State “could have achieved its legitimate political
objectives” in District 1 while producing “significantly greater
racial balance.” Cromartie II, 532 U. S., at 258. We have
repeatedly observed that an alternative map of this sort can go a
long way toward helping plaintiffs disentangle race and politics.
In Cooper, we expressed “no doubt that an alternative
districting plan . . . can serve as key evidence in a
race-versus-politics dispute.” 581 U. S., at 317. By showing that a
rational legislature, driven only by its professed mapmaking
criteria, could have produced a different map with “greater racial
balance,” Cromartie II, 532 U. S., at 258, an alternative
map can perform the critical task of distinguishing between racial
and political motivations when race and partisanship are closely
entwined. For that reason, we have said that when all plaintiffs
can muster is “meager direct evidence of a racial gerrymander”
“only [an alternative] ma[p] of that kind” can “carry the day.”
Cooper, 581 U. S., at 322.

															Nor is an alternative map difficult to produce.
Any expert armed with a computer “can easily churn out
redistricting maps that control for any number of specified
criteria, including prior voting patterns and political party
registration.” Id., at 337 (opinion of Alito, J.). The
Challengers enlisted four experts who could have made these
maps at little marginal cost. Dr. Imai's simulations generated
20,000 different maps—but none that actually controlled for
politics. The evidentiary force of an alternative map, coupled with
its easy availability, means that trial courts should draw an
adverse inference from a plaintiff 's failure to submit one. The
adverse inference may be dispositive in many, if not most, cases
where the plaintiff lacks direct evidence or some extraordinarily
powerful circumstantial evidence such as the “strangely irregular
twenty-eight-sided” district lines in Gomillion v.
Lightfoot, 364 U.S.
339, 341 (1960), which betrayed the State's aim of segregating
voters on the basis of race with “mathematical” precision,
ibid.

															The District Court, however, misunderstood our
case law when it held that an alternative map is relevant only for
the purpose of showing that a remedy is plausible. 49 F. Supp 3d,
at 198-199. Because “a constitutionally compliant plan for
[District 1] can be designed without undue difficulty,” the
District Court concluded that it was “not necessary for Plaintiffs
to present an acceptable alternative map to prevail on their
claims.” Id., at 199. That is wrong. A plaintiff 's failure
to submit an alternative map—precisely because it can be designed
with ease—should be interpreted by district courts as an implicit
concession that the plaintiff cannot draw a map that undermines the
legislature's defense that the districting lines were “based on a
permissible, rather than a prohibited, ground.” Cooper, 581
U. S., at 317. The District Court's conclusions are clearly
erroneous because it did not follow this basic logic.

															E

															Despite its length, the dissent boils down to
six main points. None is valid.

															First, the dissent suggests that
clear-error review is a perfunctory task, see post, at 10,
but that is not so. While district court findings of fact are
generally correct, conscientious district courts sometimes err, and
appellants are entitled to meaningful appellate review. Does the
dissent really think that all district court findings on the
question of racial discrimination are virtually immune from
reversal?

															Second, the dissent attacks the
proposition that in redistricting cases the “good faith of [the]
state legislature must be presumed.” Miller, 515 U. S., at
915. But, as the citation to Justice Kennedy's opinion for the
Court in Miller reveals, that presumption is an established
feature of our case law.

															Third, the dissent claims that our
decision is inconsistent with Cooper, but the dissent's
argument is based on an imaginary version of that opinion. Nothing
in Cooper is inconsistent with the venerable rule that a
factfinder may draw an adverse inference when a party fails to
produce highly probative evidence that it could readily obtain if
in fact such evidence exists. See Interstate Circuit, Inc.
v. United States, 306 U.S.
208, 226 (1939); see also 2 J. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at
Common Law §291, pp. 227-229 (Chadbourn rev. 1979). “[T]his rule
can be traced as far back as 1722” and “has been utilized in scores
of modern cases.” International Union, United Auto, Aerospace
and Agricultural Implement Workers of Am. (UAW) v. NLRB,
459 F.2d 1329, 1336 (CADC 1972). The dissent is correct that this
inference “pack[s] a wallop” in such cases, post, at 10, but
that is only because an adequate alternative map is remarkably easy
to produce—as demonstrated by the fact that the Challengers
introduced tens of thousands of other maps into the record. Under
such circumstances, if a sophisticated plaintiff bringing a
racial-gerrymandering claim cannot provide an alternative map, that
is most likely because such a map cannot be created. It would be
clear error for the factfinder to overlook this shortcoming.

															Fourth, the dissent argues that the
Challengers were blindsided when the State argued at trial that its
map was drawn to achieve a political goal. Post, at 13-14.
But there is ample evidence that the State's aim was well known
before trial. See supra, at 21-22. And neither the
Challengers nor the dissent can explain why the Challengers'
experts, who created thousands of maps that took into account all
sorts of variables, supposedly never even tried to create a
District 1 that had a higher BVAP while achieving the legislature's
political goals. Nor can they explain why, if such a map can be
created, the Challengers' experts did not produce one during the
trial.

															Fifth, the dissent makes much of the fact
that Roberts had taken racial demographics into account in drawing
maps in the past and was aware of the racial makeup of the various
districts he created in this case. But there is nothing nefarious
about his awareness of the State's racial demographics. Roberts has
spent nearly 20 years drawing maps for various state and local
initiatives, and it is therefore entirely unsurprising that he
exhibited a wealth of knowledge about who lives in which part of
the State. Cf. Miller, 515 U. S., at 916 (state
redistricting officials “will . . . almost always be aware of
racial demographics” during the districting process). The dissent
seeks to undercut Roberts's credibility by labeling him “a veteran
consumer of racial data.” Post, at 18. We think it is unfair
for the dissent to question his credibility simply because he, like
every other expert who has ever worked on a Voting Rights Act case,
has had to “consum[e] . . . racial data” to comply with our
precedents.

															Finally, the dissent thinks that the
State must have used racial data because that data, in its view, is
more accurate than political data in predicting future votes.
Refusing to use the racial data, according to the dissent, would
have required the “self-restraint of a monk.” Post, at 21.
This jaded view is inconsistent with our case law's longstanding
instruction that the “good faith of [the] state legislature must be
presumed” in redistricting cases. Miller, 515 U. S., at 915.
And in any event, there is little reason to think that it requires
much restraint for a mapmaker with a political aim to use data that
bears directly on what he is trying to achieve, namely, political
data. That is especially so where, as here, the political data,
unlike the racial data that the dissent prefers, took into account
voter turnout. See supra, at 17-19, and n. 7.

															In sum, there is no substance to the dissent's
attacks.

															IV

															The Challengers also raised an independent
vote-dilution claim. The District Court held that this claim was
governed by the “same findings of fact and reasoning” that guided
its racial-gerrymandering analysis, and it thus entered judgment
for the Challengers on that ground as well. 649 F. Supp. 3d, at
198. But in light of our conclusion that those findings were
clearly erroneous, that conclusion cannot stand. Moreover, the
District Court's analysis did not take into account the differences
between vote-dilution and racial-gerrymandering claims.

															A racial-gerrymandering claim asks whether race
predominated in the drawing of a district “regardless of the
motivations” for the use of race. Shaw I, 509 U. S., at 645.
The racial classification itself is the relevant harm in that
context. A vote-dilution claim is “analytically distinct” from a
racial-gerrymandering claim and follows a “different analysis.”
Id., at 650, 652. A plaintiff pressing a vote- dilution
claim cannot prevail simply by showing that race played a
predominant role in the districting process. Rather, such a
plaintiff must show that the State “enacted a particular voting
scheme as a purposeful device to minimize or cancel out the voting
potential of racial or ethnic minorities.” Miller, 515 U.
S., at 911 (internal quotation marks omitted). In other words, the
plaintiff must show that the State's districting plan “has the
purpose and effect” of diluting the minority vote. Shaw
I, 509 U. S., at 649 (emphasis added).

															In light of these two errors in the District
Court's analysis of the Challengers' vote-dilution claim, a remand
is appropriate.

															* * *

															We reverse the judgment of the District Court
in part and remand the case in part for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
A plaintiff can also establish
racial predominance by showing that the legislature used “race as a
proxy” for “political interest[s].” Miller, 515 U. S., at
914; see also Cooper v. Harris, 581 U.S. 285, 291, n.
1 (2017) (noting that strict scrutiny is warranted when “a
legislature elevated race to the predominant criterion in order to
advance other goals, including political ones”).
2
See, e.g., Pew Research
Center, Behind Biden's 2020 Victory (June 30, 2021),
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/06/30/behind-bidens-2020-victory/;
NBC News, South Carolina Presidential Election Results 2020 (Nov.
3, 2020),
https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-elections/south-carolina-president-results/;
N. Y. Times, South Carolina Exit Polls: How Different Groups Voted
(Nov. 3, 2020),
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/11/03/us/elections/exit-polls-south-carolina.html.
3
N. Y. Times, South Carolina
Election Results: First House Dis-trict (Jan. 28, 2019),
https://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/south-carolina-house-district-1.
4
N. Y. Times, South Carolina
Election Results: First Congressional District (Nov. 3, 2020),
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/11/03/us/elections/results-south-carolina-house-district-1.html.
5
During the proceedings, one of
the judges described Roberts as “a very precise guy” and a “good
man.” J. S. A. 74a, 421a. That judge also remarked that he “always
liked asking [Roberts] questions,” that “the legislature's blessed
to have Mr. Roberts,” and that if Roberts says a report is not
accurate, “that's good enough for [him].” Id., at 74a-75a,
254a, 263a.
6
The dissent is correct to note
that it is not enough for a plaintiff to show that race was a mere
factor in the State's redistricting calculus. Rather, the plaintiff
must show that race played a “ ‘predominant' ” role in shaping a
district's lines. Post, at 17, n. 4 (opinion of Kagan, J.)
(quoting Miller, 515 U. S., at 916). But the dissent then
retreats from this standard because the State denied relying at all
on racial data. Post, at 17, n. 4. That is a puzzling
argument. Parties can stipulate to issues of fact, but they cannot
by stipulation amend the law. See, e.g., United States
Natl. Bank of Ore. v. Independent Ins. Agents of
America, 508 U.S.
439, 447 (1993). And it would be uniquely perverse to deprive
the State of a more generous constitutional standard simply because
it made the laudable effort to disregard race altogether in the
redistricting process.
7
The dissent argues that racial
data is superior because black Democrats are more loyal to the
party than white Democrats. Post, at 21-22. But whether or
not this is true (and the dissent relies solely on the say-so of
one witness), studies show that non-white voters turn out at a much
lower rate than white voters. See Brennan Center for Justice, K.
Morris & C. Grange, Large Racial Turnout Gap Persisted in 2020
Election (Aug. 6, 2021),
https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/large-racial-turnout-gap-persisted-2020-election.
8
The dissent excuses Dr.
Ragusa's failure to control for contiguity on the ground that a
vast majority of the precincts in old District 1 could have been
moved into District 6 without violating contiguity. Post, at
29. However, a quick look at the precincts in the counties that
fall within District 1 shows that this is plainly untrue. (Links to
some of the relevant precinct maps are provided below.) Many
precincts would have had to jump over quite a few others in order
to join District 6. In addition, the dissent ignores the other
objectives that the new map sought to achieve, namely, the
unification of Beaufort and Berkeley Counties and the division of
Charleston between Districts 1 and 6 so that the city would
predictably have one Democratic House Member and one Republican
House Member. For the voting precincts in Beaufort County, see
https://rfa.sc.gov/sites/default/files/2024-01/Beaufort%20Precincts%202024.pdf.
For Ber-keley County, see
https://rfa.sc.gov/sites/default/files/2022-04/Berkeley%20Precincts.pdf.
9
Two differences in particular
stand out. First, while Dr. Ragusa looked only at Democratic voters
to control for partisanship, Professor Ansolabehere looked at both
Democratic and Republican voters. 1 App. in Cooper v.
Harris, O. T. 2016, No. 15-1262, pp. 334-337. Only after
calculating the percentage of black voters moved in each partisan
group did Professor Ansolabehere conclude that “race, and not
party, had a disproportionate effect on the configuration of ” the
congressional districts. Id., at 337. Second, Professor
Ansolabehere's analysis operated at the voter level. Id., at
313-314. That enabled him to compare the demographics of the moved
voters to the general population in a way that Dr. Ragusa's
precinct-level analysis cannot.
10 See N. Y.
Times, South Carolina Governor Primary Election Results (Nov. 3,
2020),
https://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/south-carolina-governor-primary-election;
N. Y. Times, South Carolina Presidential Election Results (Nov. 3,
2020),
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/11/03/us/elections/results-south-carolina-president.html;
see also App. 135 (testimony of Baodong Liu) (noting that
Presidential election years “usually ha[ve] a very high level of
voter turnout”).
11 The
dissent, by contrast, would make it virtually impossible to show
clear error in a case like this. The dissent agrees that a
plaintiff raising a racial-gerrymandering claim bears a “demanding
burden.” Post, at 10 (opinion of Kagan, J.). But according
to the dissent's view, clear-error review means that this burden
vanishes on appeal because a plaintiff 's “hardest job should be
done” once it prevails before a three-judge district court.
Ibid. That misses the point. In assessing whether a finding
is clearly erroneous, it is important to keep in mind the standard
of proof that the district court was required to apply. It is
hornbook law, after all, that we must ask on appeal whether the
“factfinder in the first instance made a mistake in concluding that
a fact had been proven under the applicable standard of
proof.” Concrete Pipe & Products of Cal., Inc. v.
Construction Laborers Pension Trust for Southern Cal.,
508 U.S.
602, 622-623 (1993) (emphasis added); see also H. Edwards &
L. Elliott, Federal Standards of Review 26 (3d ed. 2018) (“[I]n
applying the clearly erroneous standard, a reviewing court must
take account of the standard of proof informing the trial court's
factual finding”). Once our task is framed properly, we can easily
conclude for the reasons that follow that the District Court
clearly erred when it found that the Challengers carried their
“demanding burden.”


