::decision_cite:: 22-800
::decision_name::  Moore v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–800

															_________________

															CHARLES G. MOORE, et ux., PETITIONERS
v. UNITED STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															

															Justice Barrett, with whom Justice Alito
joins, concurring in the judgment.

															This case comes down to two questions. Have the
Moores realized income from their KisanKraft shares? And if they
have not, may Congress attribute KisanKraft’s income to the
Moores?

															Our precedent already decides the first
question: Shareholders receive income when they sell their shares
or when a corporation distributes profits back to its investors by
declaring a dividend. Notwithstanding this precedent, the
Government asserts its power to tax without apportionment
all economic gains, including appreciation in property
value. The Court does not address this issue. Ante, at 8. It
focuses on the second instead, and, casting our precedent as well
settled, holds that Congress can attribute KisanKraft’s income to
the Moores. As I explain below, I think the issue is more complex
than the Court lets on. But whatever my disagreement with the
Court’s reasoning, it bears emphasis that the Moores’ case involves
the Mandatory Repatriation Tax (MRT), which is a specific tax
imposed upon the American shareholders of a closely held foreign
corporation. A different tax—for example, a tax on shareholders of
a widely held or domestic corporation—would present a different
case.

															I

															The question on which we granted review is
“[w]hether the Sixteenth Amendment authorizes Congress to tax
unrealized sums without apportionment among the states.” Pet. for
Cert. i. The answer is straightforward: No.

															A

															The Constitution distinguishes between taxes
on income and taxes on property. Income taxes must apply uniformly
across the country, Art. I, §8, cl. 1, while “direct”
taxes—like property taxes—must be apportioned among the States, §2,
cl. 3; §9, cl. 4.[1]
Apportionment is an onerous burden, both technically and
politically, because it requires Congress to allocate the total tax
liability to each State according to its population. There have
been very few federal property taxes in this nation’s history (and
none in the modern era). By design and in fact, the apportionment
rule has left property taxation primarily to the States. See
post, at 7–12 (Thomas, J., dissenting).

															In Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan &
Trust Co., the Court held that the apportionment rule applies
not only to taxes on real and personal property, but also to taxes
on income “derived” from that property—say, rents from leasing
farmland. 158 U.S.
601, 618 (1895). The decision left Congress effectively unable
to tax most nonlabor income. The Sixteenth Amendment overruled
Pollock’s second holding, stating that “Congress shall have
power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source
derived, without apportionment.” But it did not overrule
Pollock’s first holding that taxes on personal property are
direct taxes. See Brushaber v. Union Pacific
R. Co., 240 U.S.
1, 19 (1916); National Federation of Independent
Business v. Sebelius, 567 U.S.
519, 571 (2012).

															As the text of the Sixteenth Amendment
indicates, income is financial gain that “derive[s]” from property
or another source. See, e.g., United States v.
Phellis, 257 U.S.
156, 168–169 (1921); Stratton’s Independence,
Ltd. v. Howbert, 231 U.S.
399, 415 (1913); Webster’s New International Dictionary 1089
(1909) (Webster’s) (“income” is “[t]hat gain or recurrent benefit
(usually measured in money) which proceeds from labor, business, or
property”). To capture the distinction between property and income,
we have described property as the “seed” and income as the “fruit
that it will yield.” United States v. Safety Car Heating
& Lighting Co., 297 U.S.
88, 99 (1936). Thus, a condominium is a landlord’s property,
and rents are the income she receives from leasing it. A patent is
an inventor’s property, and royalties are the income she receives
from licensing it. A capital fund is a banker’s property, and
interest is the income she receives from lending it.

															The Sixteenth Amendment’s reference to income
“derived” from any source encompasses a requirement that income, to
be taxed without apportionment, must be realized. See
post, at 23–25 (Thomas, J., dissenting). While the
Government stresses that the Amendment did not include a
“realization” requirement, Brief for United States 15–16, “realize”
and “derive” have long referred to the same concept. Compare
Webster’s 1778 (“realize” means to “convert an intangible right or
property into real (tangible) property”; to “convert any kind of
property (considered as fluctuating or uncertain in value) into
money”), with id., at 601 (“derivation” is the “[a]ct of
receiving anything from a source, as profits from capital”). The
Court has used “realization” this way (including in today’s
opinion) when discussing income taxes on corporate shareholders.
See, e.g., ante, at 8; Cullinan v.
Walker, 262 U.S.
134, 138
(1923). And we have also used the term “realized” in cases
involving a tax on accumulated corporate earnings, Ivan Allen
Co. v. United States, 422 U.S.
617, 627–629 (1975), debt discharge, United States v.
Kirby Lumber Co., 284 U.S.
1, 3 (1931), real estate improvements, Helvering v.
Bruun, 309 U.S.
461, 469 (1940), punitive damages, Commissioner v.
Glenshaw Glass Co., 348 U.S.
426, 431 (1955), and meal allowances, Commissioner v.
Kowalski, 434 U.S.
77, 83 (1977), to name a few. Many opinions use “derived” and
“realized” more or less interchangeably. See, e.g.,
Diedrich v. Commissioner, 457
U.S. 191, 199 (1982); Commissioner v. Jacobson,
336 U.S.
28, 39 (1949); Helvering v. Horst, 311 U.S.
112, 118 (1940); Goodrich v. Edwards, 255 U.S.
527, 535 (1921); Gray v. Darlington, 15 Wall. 63,
65–66 (1872); Pollock, 158 U. S., at 696 (Jackson, J.,
dissenting).

															The “commonly understood meaning of the term”
income when the Sixteenth Amendment was ratified requires that a
gain be “realized” or “derived”—e.g., through a sale
or other transaction—to be taxed without apportionment.
Merchants’ Loan & Trust Co. v. Smietanka,
255 U.S.
509, 519–520 (1921); see post, at 23–25
(Thomas, J., dissenting). “Income within the meaning of
the Sixteenth Amendment . . . is income as the word is
known in the common speech of men.” Safety Car, 297
U. S., at 99. And in the years surrounding the ratification of
the Sixteenth Amendment, income “was used in ordinary parlance to
refer only to realized gains.” Brief for Professors of Law and
Linguistics as Amicus Curiae 17; see id., at
18–22 (instances of the word “income” between 1900 and 1912 in the
Corpus of Historical American English referred to “economic gain
tied to a realization event”).

															Regardless of whether one uses the term
“derived” or “realized,” the important point is this: The Sixteenth
Amendment and the Direct Tax Clause distinguish between taxes on
property, which are subject to apportionment, and taxes on income
derived or realized from that property, which are not.

															B

															The Moores have not realized income from their
KisanKraft shares. Shares yield income when the corporation
declares a dividend—i.e., when the corporation
distributes its profits to shareholders. See Lynch v.
Hornby, 247 U.S.
339, 344 (1918) (“Dividends are the appropriate fruit of stock
ownership [and] are commonly reckoned as income”); Gibbons
v. Mahon, 136 U.S.
549, 557–558 (1890). But KisanKraft has never declared a
dividend. Nor have the Moores realized income by selling or
otherwise disposing of their shares. See Taft v.
Bowers, 278 U.S.
470, 481–482 (1929). Because they have not received a dividend,
profit from selling their shares, or any other pecuniary benefit
from their stock ownership, the Moores have not yet received a
return on their original investment in the company. In short, they
have not “derived” income from their shares because nothing has
come in.

															The Government resists this conclusion. It
concedes, as it must, that a tax on the “total value of ” the
shares “at a particular point [in] time” is a “quintessential tax
on property” that must be apportioned. Tr. of Oral Arg. 127–128;
see NFIB, 567 U. S., at 571; Brushaber, 240
U. S., at 19. But looking at property value across two
points in time makes a difference, the Government says, because
then the tax targets appreciation rather than the asset’s
value. As the Government sees it, Congress may tax without
apportionment “all economic gains” measured “ ‘between
two points in time.’ ” Brief for United States 9, 15. And the
increase in value between Time A and Time B is “income.”

															The Government is unable to cite a single
decision upholding an unapportioned tax on appreciation. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 89, 91–92. That is no surprise, because our precedent
forecloses the Government’s argument. We have explained that income
includes neither “a gain accruing to capital” nor “a growth or
increment of value in the investment.” Phellis, 257
U. S., at 169; see also Safety Car, 297 U. S., at
99 (income is the “fruit that is born of capital, not the potency
of fruition”). And we have stressed that “economic gain is
not always taxable as income.” Bruun, 309 U. S.,
at 469 (emphasis added); see also Commissioner v.
Indianapolis Power & Light Co., 493
U.S. 203, 214 (1990) (“[A] taxpayer does not realize taxable
income from every event that improves his economic condition”).
Although appreciation looks valuable on paper, “the stockholder has
received nothing out of the company’s assets for his separate use
and benefit,” and market fluctuations could “wip[e] out the entire
investment” before the owner ever receives a dime of “income within
the meaning of the Sixteenth Amendment.” Eisner v.
Macomber, 252 U.S.
189, 211 (1920).

															If the Government were right that appreciation
is income, it is hard to make sense of our decision in Ivan
Allen Co. There, we considered a tax on accumulated
earnings—i.e., income that the corporation retains as
assets on its balance sheet instead of distributing to its
shareholders. 422 U. S., at 624–625. Because corporate tax
rates were generally lower than individuals’ marginal tax rates,
Congress was concerned that corporations would be used to reduce
their “shareholders’ overall tax liability by accumulating earnings
beyond the reasonable needs of the business.” Id., at 624.
So Congress imposed a tax on earnings that corporations allowed to
accumulate “beyond the reasonable and reasonably anticipated needs
of the business.” Id., at 621, 624. In upholding the tax, we
took great care to explain that the tax “is not directed at the
unrealized appreciation of liquid assets”; “any unrealized
appreciation in the value of the taxpayer’s portfolio
. . . does not enter into the computation” of the tax.
Id., at 627–628. The tax took into account the value and
appreciation of the corporation’s assets “only in measuring
reasonableness of accumulation of the earnings and profits that
otherwise independently exist.” Id., at 628. In other words,
asset appreciation was only relevant with respect to how much of
the corporation’s income could be taxed under the statute.
More assets meant less income reasonably could be accumulated. If
asset appreciation itself were just as taxable as income, there
would have been no reason for the Court’s painstaking efforts to
explain the scope of the tax. See id., at 627–629.[2]

															C

															In upholding the tax, the Ninth Circuit opined
that “[w]hether the taxpayer has realized income does not determine
whether a tax is constitutional.” 36 F. 4th 930, 935 (2022). In its
view, the “Supreme Court has made clear that realization of income
is not a constitutional requirement.” Id., at 936. The Ninth
Circuit misread our cases. Contrary to its assertion, this Court
has “never abandoned the core requirement that income must be
realized to be taxable without apportionment.” 53 F. 4th 507, 508
(CA9 2022) (Bumatay, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en
banc). What we have done is reject efforts to narrow what it
means to realize income.

															For example, in Helvering v.
Bruun—one of the cases on which the Ninth Circuit relied—we
clarified that “the realization of gain need not be in cash derived
from the sale of an asset” but can also “result [from] exchange of
property, payment of the taxpayer’s indebtedness, relief from a
liability, or other profit realized from the completion of a
transaction.” 309 U. S., at 469. In that case, a tenant built
a valuable building on the landlord’s property. Upon termination of
the lease, the landlord regained possession of the property—and
acquired the building too. When the Internal Revenue Service came
calling, the landlord protested that he had realized no taxable
gain from the building in the year that the lease ended. We sided
with the IRS. Gain from a contributed building is not like
an “accrua[l] of value due to extraneous and adventitious
circumstances”—for example, appreciation from a booming real estate
market. Id., at 467. Nor does realization require the
ability to “sever the improvement begetting the gain from [the]
original capital.” Id., at 469. “If that were necessary,” we
said, “no income could arise from the exchange of property; whereas
such gain has always been recognized as taxable gain.” Ibid.
None of that remotely suggests, however, that realization is not
required or (relatedly) that appreciation counts as taxable income.
Instead, it explains that profit (there, the building) is realized
when received, even if it cannot be physically separated from the
capital (there, the land).

															In dispensing with the realization requirement,
the Ninth Circuit also cited Helvering v. Horst. But
Horst, like Bruun, emphasizes that realization does
not require cash in hand—not that realization is irrelevant.
In Horst, “the owner of negotiable bonds . . .
detached from them negotiable interest coupons shortly before their
due date and delivered them as a gift to his son who in the same
year collected them at maturity.” 311 U. S., at 114. The bond
owner insisted that the interest coupons were not income taxable to
him, because his son owned them at the time they came due.
See id., at 114–115. We rejected the argument that the bond
owner could “escape all tax by giving away his right to income in
advance of payment.” Id., at 116. “The power to dispose of
income is the equivalent of ownership of it.” Id., at 118.
And while the donor chose not to take the interest itself, he still
“realized the fruits of his investment.” Id., at 117
(emphasis added). Realization does not depend on how the user
chooses to enjoy the income—whether through “the purchase of goods
at the corner grocery, the payment of his debt there, or such
non-material satisfactions as may result from . . . a
gift to his favorite son.” Ibid. Far from disavowing the
realization requirement, the Court emphasized that a taxpayer
cannot escape realization (and therefore tax liability) by giving
away the fruit of his capital.

															In sum, realization may take many forms, but our
precedent uniformly holds that it is required before the Government
may tax financial gain without apportionment. Realization is a
question of substance, not form. Diedrich, 457 U. S.,
at 195. In general, realization is “the last step . . .
by which [one] obtains the fruition of the economic gain which has
already accrued to him.” Horst, 311 U. S., at 115. Our
cases describe many ways income might be realized; a rigid
definition does not capture them all. See, e.g.,
MacLaughlin v. Alliance Ins. Co., 286 U.S.
244, 249 (1932) (“sale or other disposition of property”);
Safety Car, 297 U. S., at 93 (“profits owing to a
patentee by the infringer of a patent”); Kirby Lumber, 284
U. S., at 2–3 (“clear gain” resulting from corporation
repurchasing bonds it issued for less than the corporation had
initially “received [for] their par value”). The common thread is
that to realize income, one must receive something new and valuable
beyond the property she already owns.

															II

															Though the Moores did not realize income as
shareholders, KisanKraft realized income as a corporation—profits
from supplying farm equipment to customers in India. The Government
argues that, because the MRT targets KisanKraft’s realized income,
it falls within the Sixteenth Amendment and is not subject to the
apportionment rule. Brief for United States 42. But the question is
not whether some taxable person or entity has realized
income at some point. Rather, as the Court emphasizes, we
must determine whether Congress has the power to tax the Moores on
income that KisanKraft realized. Ante, at 8. Put
differently, can Congress disregard KisanKraft’s corporate form,
attribute KisanKraft’s income to its shareholders, and tax its
shareholders on that income?

															The Court concludes that it can, describing our
case law as “clear and definitive” in the Government’s favor.
Ante, at 13. I read our cases differently. As I understand
our precedent, it leaves room for Congress to disregard the
corporate form in some circumstances. But that is not because
Congress—as the Court suggests—can treat corporations
interchangeably with partnerships, whose partners have always been
subject to pass-through taxation on the partnership’s income. See
United States v. Basye, 410 U.S.
441, 453–454 (1973). Rather, our cases allow Congress to
disregard the corporate form to determine whether the shareholder
received income in substance, if not in form.

															A

															Our precedent suggests that Congress’s power
to attribute a corporation’s income to its shareholders for tax
purposes is limited. Eisner v. Macomber is the most
recent case addressing this issue—and it was decided more than a
century ago. There, the Standard Oil Company of California chose to
reinvest its profits back into the corporation rather than
distributing them to shareholders. 252 U. S., at 200. Those
retained earnings caused an imbalance in the corporation’s capital
account. So to adjust its books, Standard Oil declared a stock
dividend that issued new shares to existing shareholders while
diluting the value of their previous shares—which left the
shareholders in the same financial position as before the
transaction. See id., at 200–201, 212. The Court held that
shareholder Myrtle Macomber did not realize income from the
stock dividend because she “received nothing out of the company’s
assets for [her] separate use and benefit.” Id., at 211. The
shareholder’s original investment “still remains the property of
the company, and subject to business risks which may result in
wiping out the entire investment.” Ibid. The stock dividends
were “evidenc[e]” that her capital previously had
appreciated, but the dividends themselves “added nothing to”
her property and were therefore not income derived from it.
Id., at 212 (while the “shareholder is the richer because of
an increase of his capital . . . he has not realized or
received any income in the transaction”).[3]

															Importantly for our purposes, the Court also
rejected the Government’s theory that Congress could attribute the
corporation’s income to its shareholders. See id., at
213. The Court expressed “no doubt of the power or duty of a court
to look through the form of the corporation and determine the
question of the stockholder’s right, in order to ascertain
whether he has received income taxable by Congress without
apportionment.” Ibid. (emphasis added). But the Court would
not “disregard the essential truth disclosed”: It would not “ignore
the substantial difference between corporation and stockholder” and
“treat the entire organization as unreal; look upon stockholders as
partners, when they are not such . . . and indulge the
fiction that they have received and realized a share of the profits
of the company which in truth they have neither received nor
realized.” Id., at 214. The Court therefore refused to
uphold the tax as a tax on attributed corporate income.

															That left one potential justification for the
tax—that the Direct Tax Clause’s apportionment requirement did not
apply to taxes on the stockholder’s undivided interest in the
corporation. The Court rejected that argument too, adhering to
Pollock’s holding that a tax on a shareholder’s ownership
interest is a tax on property. The Court explained that
Pollock “overruled” the holding of Collector v.
Hubbard, 12 Wall. 1 (1871), that Congress could “tax without
apportionment a stockholder’s interest in accumulated earnings
prior to dividend declared,” Macomber, 252 U. S., at
218. The Court acknowledged that the Sixteenth Amendment had
overruled Pollock’s holding that a tax on income
derived from property must be apportioned. 252
U. S., at 219. But it stressed that the Sixteenth Amendment
did not otherwise disturb the law concerning the Direct Tax
Clause—including Pollock’s holding that the Clause applies
to “property, real and personal.” Id., at 206; see
id., at 219 (“[T]he Amendment applies to income only”).
Because a stockholder’s ownership interest in the corporation is
personal property—“capital, not income”—Congress must apportion any
tax on it. Ibid.

															Today, the Court does not dispute either that
income requires realization or that a tax on stock ownership must
be apportioned. Instead, it says that the income of a closely held
foreign corporation can be attributed to its shareholders for tax
purposes. That might be right, but the Court’s reasons for saying
so are wrong: It dismisses the “attribution” portion of
Macomber as dicta and argues that four subsequent cases
undercut it. Ante, at 13. I disagree. None of these cases
contradicts Macomber’s admonition that Congress cannot “look
upon stockholders as partners . . . when they are not”;
Congress may not “indulge the fiction that they have received and
realized a share of the profits of the company” when they have not.
252 U. S., at 214; see also Helvering v.
Griffiths, 318 U.S.
371, 376–377, and n. 11 (1943). Rather, the Court’s cases
all illustrate the principle that the validity of an income tax
must be assessed “according to truth and substance, [not] form.”
Macomber, 252 U. S., at 206.

															Burk-Waggoner Oil Assn. v. Hopkins
upheld Congress’s power to tax an “unincorporated joint stock
association” as a corporation even though state law treated it as a
partnership. 269 U.S.
110, 110–111 (1925). We disregarded the state-law label because
the associations acted as corporations: They had “a fixed capital
stock divided into shares,” they “manage[d] their affairs by a
board of directors and executive officers,” and they “conduct[ed]
their business in the general form and mode of procedure of a
corporation.” Id., at 113–114. “[N]othing in the
Constitution,” we explained, “precludes Congress from taxing as a
corporation an association which, although unincorporated,
transacts its business as if it were.” Id., at 114.
Burk-Waggoner thus held that for tax purposes, Congress
could treat a partnership like a corporation when it acts like a
corporation. We did not decide whether Congress may treat a
corporation like a partnership—e.g.,
attributing its income to shareholders—when, in truth and
substance, it operates as a corporation.

															Next up is Burnet v. Leininger,
285 U.S.
136 (1932). Although that case involved a partnership, the
issue was about the “anticipatory assignment of income doctrine.”
See Commissioner v. Banks, 543
U.S. 426, 433–434 (2005) (“A taxpayer cannot exclude an
economic gain from gross income by assigning the gain in advance to
another party” (citing, inter alia, Lucas v.
Earl, 281 U.S.
111, 114–115 (1930)); 1 B. Bittker, J. Eustice, G. Goldstein,
& T. Brantley, Federal Income Taxation of Corporations and
Shareholders ¶2.07[3] (2024). The taxpayer, who happened to be
one-half partner in a laundry business, tried to reduce his tax
liability by assigning a portion of his income to his wife. 285
U. S., at 141. We rejected that artifice and affirmed
Congress’s ability to “ta[x] the salary and fees of the person who
earned them.” Id., at 141–142 (citing Lucas, 281
U. S., at 114). This case, too, is about classifying taxes
according to substance rather than form.

															The Court also invokes Heiner v.
Mellon, which blesses Congress’s power to tax “partners” on
their “proportionate share of the net income of the partnership”
even where the partnership’s income is not “currently
distributable” to the partners under state law. 304 U.S.
271, 280–281 (1938). The case rests on the “axiomatic” and
“firmly established” rule of partnership taxation that “each
partner must pay taxes on his distributive [i.e.,
proportional] share of the partnership’s income without regard to
whether that amount is actually distributed to him.” Basye,
410 U. S., at 453–454 (discussing Heiner). Given the
unique partnership context, Heiner sheds no light on
Congress’s power to tax shareholders on a corporation’s
income.[4]

															Finally, in Helvering v. National
Grocery Co., 304 U.S.
282 (1938), the Court sustained a deficiency tax imposed on a
corporation that was used to shelter the income of its sole
shareholder. (Notably, the corporation, not the shareholder, was
the taxpayer.) In the course of rejecting the corporation’s various
challenges to the tax, the Court opined that “Kohl, the sole owner
of the business, could not by conducting it as a corporation,
prevent Congress, if it chose to do so, from laying on him
individually the tax on the year’s profits.” Id., at 288.
That dictum, if correct, is consistent with Macomber’s
recognition that courts can look through the corporate form to
determine the substance of the shareholder’s relationship to the
income. Because National Grocery’s income was really just the
income of Kohl, its sole owner, the Court suggested that
attributing it to him for tax purposes would be permissible.

															Thus, in matters of corporate form and income
attribution—as in the definition of income—labels do not control.
But acknowledging that substance controls is a far cry from
asserting that Congress is free to wholly disregard the corporate
form. That would permit Congress to tax the shareholder without
regard to the substance of her relationship to the corporation and
would contradict Macomber’s holding that Standard Oil’s
income could not be attributed to its shareholders. See 252
U. S., at 213–214. Our precedent does not give Congress carte
blanche to attribute corporate income to a shareholder. Instead, it
suggests that Congress has a limited power to do so that depends on
the relationship between the shareholder and the income.[5]

															B

															Although I believe that the Court today is too
quick to bless the attribution of corporate income to shareholders,
its holding is narrow. The Court affirms Congress’s power to tax
shareholders on “the undistributed income of American-controlled
foreign corporations,” but it says that the Due Process Clause
cabins that power by requiring income attributions not to be
“arbitrary.” Ante, at 22–23. The arbitrariness inquiry, the
Court previews, turns on “the taxpayer’s relationship to the
underlying income.” Ante, at 14, n. 4 (citing
Burnet v. Wells, 289 U.S.
670, 678–679 (1933)).

															I agree that the Constitution prohibits Congress
from arbitrarily attributing to the taxpayer someone else’s income.
Our cases have located that limit in the Due Process Clause. See
Burnet, 289 U. S., at 678–679; Hoeper v. Tax
Comm’n of Wis., 284 U.S.
206, 215 (1931) (“That which is not in fact the taxpayer’s
income cannot be made such by calling it income”). But an
arbitrariness limit is implicit in the Sixteenth Amendment too.
Virtually all property was income at some point. Ford Motor Company
uses its income to buy steel for making trucks. But surely Congress
cannot attribute Ford’s earnings to anyone who owns an F–250. The
Amendment’s reference to “derived” income presupposes that the
income belongs to the taxpayer, or is at least fairly attributable
to her. Otherwise the taxpayer’s property (e.g., the truck
she drives) could be taxed without apportionment just because it
was once somebody else’s income (e.g., the
earnings Ford used to purchase the steel).

															While an arbitrariness limit on income
attribution surely exists, its contours are uncertain. We have
never before applied the arbitrariness test to a tax law that
attributes a corporation’s income to its shareholders. At oral
argument, the Government identified a series of factors that the
Court has considered in attribution cases involving license
agreements and trusts. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 119–123. One is whether
the taxpayer has “sufficient power and control over . . .
the income” that it is “reasonable to treat him as the recipient of
the income for tax purposes.” Commissioner v. Sunnen,
333 U.S.
591, 604 (1948). Another is whether the taxpayer receives a
special “privilege or benefit” from the entity that earns the
income. Burnet, 289 U. S., at 679. A third is whether
the corporation is foreign and thus outside the reach of an
accumulated earnings tax. Cf. Ivan Allen Co., 422
U. S., at 624. These factors may serve as a useful guide for
lower courts when applying today’s decision to taxes that attribute
income from other types of corporations to an individual taxpayer.
Just because Congress can attribute income of a closely held
foreign corporation like KisanKraft to its shareholders does not
mean it has equal power to attribute the income of a publicly
traded domestic corporation to anyone holding a few shares in her
retirement account.

															C

															Congress’s power to attribute the income of
closely held corporations to their shareholders is a difficult
question—and unfortunately, the parties barely addressed it.
Without focused briefing on the attribution question, I would not
resolve it. Subpart F and the MRT may or may not be constitutional,
nonarbitrary attributions of closely held foreign corporations’
income to their shareholders. In this litigation, however, the
Moores have conceded that subpart F is constitutional. Tr. of Oral
Arg. 9. And I agree with the Court that subpart F is not
meaningfully different from the MRT in how it attributes corporate
income to shareholders. Ante, at 20–21. Taxpayers generally
bear the burden to show they are entitled to a refund. United
States v. Janis, 428 U.S.
433, 440 (1976); see also Haaland v. Brackeen,
599 U.S. 255, 277–278 (2023) (burden to show unconstitutionality).
Given the Moores’ concession, they have not met that burden here.
For that reason, I concur in the Court’s judgment affirming the
judgment below.

Notes
1
 Direct taxes also include
a capitation tax, which imposes a tax on every person “without
regard to property, profession, or any other circumstance.”
National Federation of Independent Business v.
Sebelius, 567 U.S.
519, 571 (2012) (NFIB) (internal quotation marks
omitted; emphasis deleted).
2
 Although Ivan Allen
Co. involved the interpretation of a tax statute, our analysis
sheds light on the Constitution’s definition of income because we
have long interpreted “gross income” in the Internal Revenue Code
to reach “ ‘the full measure of [Congress’s] taxing
power.’ ” Commissioner v. Kowalski, 434 U.S.
77, 82 (1977) (quoting Helvering v. Clifford,
309 U.S.
331, 334 (1940)).
3
 The Court today does not
cast doubt on Macomber’s holding that appreciation is not
income. See ante, at 23.
4
 Partnerships are distinct
from corporations in many other fundamental ways. For example,
partnerships traditionally do not have a legal identity distinct
from the partners and do not enjoy the limited liability
characteristic of the corporate form. They are instead “an
aggregation of individuals operating the business as co-owners with
individual rights and duties.” 1 J. Cox & T. Hazen, Law of
Corporations §1.07 (3d ed. 2010). For purposes of federal diversity
jurisdiction, partnerships are citizens wherever their partners
are, whereas corporations have citizenship distinct from their
shareholders. See Carden v. Arkoma Associates,
494 U.S.
185, 187–189 (1990).
5
 The Court asserts that
Congress no longer observes Macomber’s distinction between
shareholders and the corporate entity for tax purposes.
Ante, at 11. That paints an incomplete picture. After
Macomber, Congress ended its longstanding practice of
attributing corporate income to shareholders when the corporation
operated as a tax shelter. See Ivan Allen Co., 422
U. S., at 624–626, and n. 8; Griffiths, 318
U. S., at 377 n. 12, 385. That practice reemerged in the
1930s when Congress began taxing shareholders of closely held
foreign corporations on undistributed corporate earnings.
Revenue Act of 1937, §201, 50Stat. 822. To my knowledge, Congress
has not returned to that approach for domestic or widely held
corporations of the kind Macomber considered. And while
Congress continues to attribute income of certain closely held
foreign corporations to their U. S. shareholders today, see 26
U. S. C. §951 et seq. (“subpart F”), doing so
might be consistent with Macomber’s recognition that
Congress can disregard the corporate form when, in substance, it is
reasonable to treat the income of the corporation as that of the
shareholders. The Court’s “arbitrariness” test seems to get at a
similar point, but, by dismissing the relevance of the corporate
form altogether, it confuses the analysis.


