::decision_cite:: 22-859
::decision_name::  SEC v. Jarkesy
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–859

															_________________

															Securities and Exchange Commission, PETITIONER
v. George R. Jarkesy, Jr., et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 27, 2024]

															Justice Gorsuch, with whom Justice Thomas
joins, concurring.

															The Court decides a single issue: Whether the
Security and Exchange Commission’s use of in-house hearings to seek
civil penalties violates the Seventh Amendment right to a jury
trial. It does. As the Court details, the government has
historically litigated suits of this sort before juries, and the
Seventh Amendment requires no less.

															I write separately to highlight that other
constitutional provisions reinforce the correctness of the Court’s
course. The Seventh Amendment’s jury-trial right does not work
alone. It operates together with Article III and the Due Process
Clause of the Fifth Amendment to limit how the government may go
about depriving an individual of life, liberty, or property. The
Seventh Amendment guarantees the right to trial by jury. Article
III entitles individuals to an independent judge who will preside
over that trial. And due process promises any trial will be held in
accord with time-honored principles. Taken together, all three
provisions vindicate the Constitution’s promise of a “fair trial in
a fair tribunal.” In re Murchison, 349 U.S.
133, 136 (1955).

															I

															In March 2013, the SEC’s Commissioners
approved charges against Mr. Jarkesy. The charges were serious; the
agency accused him of defrauding investors. The relief the agency
sought was serious, too: millions of dollars in civil penalties.
See SEC, Division of Enforcement’s Post-Hearing Memorandum of Law
in In re John Thomas Capital Management Group, LLC,
Admin. Proc. File No. 3–15255, pp. 28–29 (SEC, Apr. 7, 2014).
For most of the SEC’s 90-year existence, the Commission had to go
to federal court to secure that kind of relief against someone like
Mr. Jarkesy. Ante, at 3–4. Proceeding that way in this case
hardly would have promised him an easy ride. But it would have at
least guaranteed Mr. Jarkesy a jury, an independent judge, and
traditional procedures designed to ensure that anyone caught up in
our judicial system receives due process.

															In 2010, however, all that changed. With the
passage of the Dodd Frank Act, Congress gave the SEC an alternative
to court proceedings. Now, the agency could funnel cases like Mr.
Jarkesy’s through its own “adjudicatory” system. See 124Stat. 1376,
1862–1865. That is the route the SEC chose when it filed charges
against Mr. Jarkesy.

															There is little mystery why. The new law gave
the SEC’s Commissioners—the same officials who authorized the suit
against Mr. Jarkesy—the power to preside over his case themselves
and issue judgment. To be sure, the Commissioners opted, as they
often do, to send Mr. Jarkesy’s case in the first instance to an
“administrative law judge” (ALJ). See 17 CFR §201.110 (2023). But
the title “judge” in this context is not quite what it might seem.
Yes, ALJs enjoy some measure of independence as a matter of
regulation and statute from the lawyers who pursue charges on
behalf of the agency. But they remain servants of the same
master—the very agency tasked with prosecuting individuals like Mr.
Jarkesy. This close relationship, as others have long recognized,
can make it “extremely difficult, if not impossible, for th[e ALJ]
to convey the image of being an impartial fact finder.” B. Segal,
The Administrative Law Judge, 62 A. B. A. J. 1424,
1426 (1976). And with a jury out of the picture, the ALJ decides
not just the law but the facts as well.[1]

															Going in, then, the odds were stacked against
Mr. Jarkesy. The numbers confirm as much: According to one report,
during the period under study the SEC won about 90% of its
contested in-house proceedings compared to 69% of its cases in
court. D. Thornley & J. Blount, SEC In-House Tribunals: A Call
for Reform, 62 Vill. L. Rev. 261, 286 (2017) (Thornley).
Reportedly, too, one of the SEC’s handful of ALJs even warned
individuals during settlement discussions that he had found
defendants liable in every contested case and never once
“ ‘ruled against the agency’s enforcement division.’ ”
Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. FTC, 598 U.S. 175, 213–214
(2023) (Gorsuch, J., concurring in judgment).

															The shift from a court to an ALJ didn’t just
deprive Mr. Jarkesy of the right to an independent judge and a
jury. He also lost many of the procedural protections our courts
supply in cases where a person’s life, liberty, or property is at
stake. After an agency files a civil complaint in court, a
defendant may obtain from the SEC a large swathe of documents
relevant to the lawsuit. See Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 26(b)(1). He may
subpoena third parties for testimony and documents and take 10 oral
depositions—more with the court’s permission. Rule 45; Rule
30(a)(2)(A)(i). A court has flexibility, as well, to set deadlines
for discovery and other matters to meet the needs of the case. See
Rule 16. And come trial, the Federal Rules of Evidence apply,
meaning that hearsay is generally inadmissible and witnesses must
usually testify in person, subject to cross-examination. See Fed.
Rule Evid. 802.

															Things look very different in agency
proceedings. The SEC has a responsibility to provide “documents
that contain material exculpatory evidence.” 17 CFR §201.230(b)(3).
But the defendant enjoys no general right to discovery. Though ALJs
enjoy the power to issue subpoenas on the request of litigants like
Mr. Jarkesy, §201.232(a), they “often decline to issue [them] or
choose to significantly narrow their scope,” G. Mark, SEC and CFTC
Administrative Proceedings, 19 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 45, 68
(2016). Oral depositions are capped at five, with another two if
the ALJ grants permission. §201.233(a). In some cases, an
administrative trial must take place as soon as 1 month after
service of the charges, and that hearing must follow within 10
months in even the most complex matters. §201.360(a)(2)(ii). The
rules of evidence, including their prohibition against hearsay, do
not apply with the same rigor they do in court. §201.235(a)(5); see
§201.230. For that reason, live testimony often gives way to
“investigative testimony”—that is, a “sworn statement” taken
outside the presence of the defendant or his counsel.
§201.235(b).

															How did all this play out in Mr. Jarkesy’s case?
Accompanying its charges, the SEC disclosed 700 gigabytes of
data—equivalent to between 15 and 25 million pages of
information—it had collected during its investigation. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 164a; Complaint in Jarkesy v. U. S.
SEC, No. 1:14–cv–00114 (DDC, Jan. 29, 2014), ECF Doc. 1, ¶49,
pp. 12–13. Over Mr. Jarkesy’s protest that it would take “two
lawyers or paralegals working twelve-hour days over four decades to
review,” ibid., the ALJ gave Mr. Jarkesy 10 months to
prepare for his hearing, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 156a. Then,
after conducting that hearing, the ALJ turned around and obtained
from the Commission “an extension of six months to file [her]
initial decision.” In re John Thomas Capital Management
Group LLC, SEC Release No. 9631, p. 1 (Aug. 13, 2014). The
reason? The “ ‘size and complexity of the proceeding.’ ”
Id., at 2. When that decision eventually arrived seven
months after the hearing, the ALJ agreed with the SEC on every
charge. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 155a–156a, 212a.

															Mr. Jarkesy had the right to appeal to the
Commission, but appeals to that politically accountable body
(again, the same body that approved the charges) tend to go about
as one might expect. The Commission may decline to review the ALJ’s
decision. §201.411(b)(2). If it chooses to hear the case, it may
increase the penalty imposed on the defendant. Thornley 286.
A defendant unhappy with the result can seek further review in
court, though that process will take more time and money, too. Nor
will he find a jury there, only a judge who must follow the
agency’s findings if they are supported by “ ‘more than a mere
scintilla’ ” of evidence. Biestek v. Berryhill,
587 U.S. 97, 103 (2019).

															Mr. Jarkesy filed an appeal anyway. The
Commission agreed to review the ALJ’s decision. It then afforded
itself the better part of six years to issue an opinion. And, after
all that, it largely agreed with the ALJ. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. 71a–74a. None of this likely came as a surprise to the SEC
employees in the Division of Enforcement responsible for pressing
the action against Mr. Jarkesy. While his appeal was pending,
employees in that division—including an “ ‘Enforcement
Supervisor’ ” in the regional office prosecuting Mr.
Jarkesy—accessed confidential memos by the Commissioners’ advisors
about his appeal. See SEC, Second Commission Statement Relating to
Certain Administrative Adjudications 3 (June 2, 2023).

															II

															A

															If administrative proceedings like Mr.
Jarkesy’s seem a thoroughly modern development, the British
government and its agents engaged in a strikingly similar strategy
in colonial America. Colonial administrators routinely steered
enforcement actions out of local courts and into vice-admiralty
tribunals where they thought they would win more often. These
tribunals lacked juries. They lacked truly independent judges. And
the procedures materially differed from those available in everyday
common-law courts.

															The vice-admiralty courts in the Colonies began
as rough equivalents of English courts of admiralty. E. Surrency,
The Courts in the American Colonies, 11 Am. J. Legal Hist. 347, 355
(1967). These courts generally concerned themselves with maritime
matters arising on “the oceans and rivers and their immediate
shores.” C. Ubbelohde, The Vice-Admiralty Courts and the American
Revolution 19 (1960) (Ubbelohde). And the proceedings they used
accorded more with civil law traditions than common law ones. Among
other things, this meant officials could try cases against
colonists without a jury. Id., at 21.

															Confined to admiralty disputes, perhaps the lack
of a jury would have proven unexceptional (as juries were not
usually required in such cases then, nor are they today). See,
e.g., Lewis v. Lewis & Clark Marine, Inc.,
531 U.S.
438, 448 (2001). But Parliament deployed these juryless
tribunals in the Colonies to new ends that, according to John
Adams, could fill “ ‘volumes.’ ” Ubbelohde vii. The creep
away from the original province of those courts began with the
grant of authority over violations of certain trade and customs
laws. But in the decade before the Revolution, the drip, drip, drip
of expanding power became a torrent, as Parliament allowed more and
more actions to be brought in colonial vice-admiralty courts.

															Many of the matters added to vice-admiralty
jurisdiction in the Colonies would have required juries in England.
Id., at 112. But as the Massachusetts royal governor
explained, colonial juries “ ‘were not to be trusted.’ ”
D. Lovejoy, Rights Imply Equality: The Case Against Admiralty
Jurisdiction in America, 1764–1776, 16 Wm. & Mary Q. 459, 468
(1959). Even violations that did not implicate the jury right
normally would have been heard in England “before a court in
[one’s] own neighborhood or county where [one] could count on
traditional common-law procedure.” Id., at 471. But by
expanding the reach of vice-admiralty jurisdiction in the Colonies,
Parliament denied similar protections to Americans. See
Erlinger v. United States, 602 U. S. ___, ___
(2024) (slip op., at 5).

															Vice-admiralty court judges also lacked
independence. While judges in England since the end of the
seventeenth century generally enjoyed the protection of tenure
during good behavior, colonial judges usually served at the
pleasure of the royal administration. See United States v.
Will, 449 U.S.
200, 218–219 (1980). And, doing away with the pretense of
impartiality entirely, some vice-admiralty judges held dual
appointments—for instance, as colonial attorneys general and
vice-admiralty judges. Ubbelohde 162–163.

															Like the modern SEC, British colonial officials
were not required to bring many of their cases before the
vice-admiralty courts. Often, Parliament gave those officials the
option to proceed in either the ordinary common-law courts or the
vice-admiralty courts. Unsurprisingly, though, they sought to file
where they were most likely to win. And “[i]n this contest, the
vice-admiralty courts were usually the victors.” Id., at
21.

															B

															The abuses of these courts featured
prominently in the calls for revolution. In the First Continental
Congress, the assembled delegates condemned how Parliament
“extend[ed] the jurisdiction of Courts of Admiralty,” complained
how colonial judges were “dependent on the Crown,” and demanded the
right to the “common law of England” and the “great and inestimable
privilege” of a jury trial. Declaration and Resolves of the First
Continental Congress, Oct. 14, 1774, in 1 Journals of the
Continental Congress, 1774–1789, pp. 68–69 (W. Ford 1904 ed.).
Two years later, the drafters of the Declaration of Independence
repeated these concerns, admonishing the King for “ma[king] Judges
dependent on his Will alone,” ¶11, and “[f]or depriving [the
colonists] in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury,” ¶20.
By that point, however, the “musket fire at Lexington and Concord
. . . signaled the end not only of the vice-admiralty
courts, but of all British rule in America.” Ubbelohde 190.

															When the smoke settled, the American people went
to great lengths to prevent a backslide toward anything like the
vice-admiralty courts. Erlinger, 602 U. S., at ___–___
(slip op., at 5–6). One product of these efforts was Article III of
the Constitution. There, the Constitution provided that “[t]he
judicial Power”—the power over “Cases” and “Controversies”—would
lie with life-tenured, salary-protected judges. §§1–2; see Oil
States Energy Services, LLC v. Greene’s Energy Group,
LLC, 584 U.S. 325, 346 (2018) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting).
As the Court has recognized, this meant the Executive Branch could
“exercise no part of th[e] judicial power.” Murray’s Lessee
v. Hoboken Land & Improvement Co., 18 How. 272, 275
(1856), “no matter how court-like [its] decisionmaking process
might appear,” Ortiz v. United States, 585 U.S. 427,
465 (2018) (Alito, J., dissenting). Nor could Congress
“withdraw from judicial cognizance any matter which, from its
nature, is the subject of a suit at the common law, or in equity,
or admiralty”—the traditional scope of the “judicial Power.”
Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 284; see Art. III, §2.

															Despite these guarantees, many at the founding
thought Article III didn’t go far enough. Yes, it promised a
defendant an independent judge rather than one dependent on those
who hold political power. But what would stop Congress from
requiring litigants to navigate vice-admiralty’s alien procedures
in all federal cases? Or from making “federal processes”
even more byzantine, so “as to [effectively] destroy
[individual] rights?” Letter from a Federal Farmer (Jan. 20, 1788),
in 2 The Complete Anti-Federalist 328 (H. Storing ed. 1981).

															And what about civil juries? “[T]he jury trial,”
one prominent Anti-Federalist observed, “brings with it an open and
public discussion of all causes, and excludes secret and arbitrary
proceedings.” Letter from a Federal Farmer (Jan. 18, 1788), in
id., at 320 (Federal Farmer 15). The participation of
ordinary Americans “drawn from the body of the people” serves
another function, too: “If the conduct of judges shall
. . . tend to subvert the laws, and change the forms of
government, the jury may check them.” Ibid. As originally
composed, however, the Constitution promised a trial by jury for
“all Crimes,” but said nothing about civil cases. Art III, §2,
cl. 3. Some wondered, did this mean judges, not juries, would
be “left masters as to facts” in civil disputes? Federal Farmer 15,
at 322. If so, asked another, “what satisfaction can we expect from
a lordly court of justice, always ready to protect the officers of
government against the weak and helpless citizen”? Essay of a
Democratic Federalist (Oct. 17, 1787), in 3 Complete
Anti-Federalist 61.

															The answer to these concerns was the Bill of
Rights. Erlinger, 602 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6).
As the Court details, the Seventh Amendment promised the right to a
jury trial in “ ‘[s]uits at common law.’ ” Ante,
at 8 (quoting Amdt. 7). But because the Constitution was designed
to “endure for ages to come,” McCulloch v. Maryland,
4 Wheat. 316, 415 (1819), this did not mean only those “suits,
which the common law recognized among its old and settled
proceedings,” Parsons v. Bedford, 3 Pet. 433, 447
(1830). The founding generation anticipated the possibility
Congress would introduce new causes of action and perhaps new
remedies, too. See ibid. Accordingly, this Court has long
understood the Seventh Amendment’s protections to apply in “all
[civil] suits which are not of equity [or] admiralty jurisdiction.”
Ibid.; accord, ante, at 8–9. In this way, the Seventh
Amendment seeks to ensure there will be no juryless vice-admiralty
courts in the United States.

															The Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause
addressed remaining concerns about the processes that would attend
trials before independent judges and juries. It provided that the
government may not deprive anyone of “life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law.” As originally understood, this
provision prohibited the government from “depriv[ing] a person of
those rights without affording him the benefit of (at least) those
customary procedures to which freemen were entitled by the old law
of England.” Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U.S. 148, 176
(2018) (Gorsuch, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Erlinger,
602 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 6–7).

															More than that, because it was “the peculiar
province of the judiciary” to safeguard life, liberty, and
property, due process often meant judicial process. 1 St.
George Tucker, Blackstone’s Commentaries, Editor’s App. 358 (1803).
That is, if the government sought to interfere with those rights,
nothing less than “the process and proceedings of the common law”
had to be observed before any such deprivation could take place. 3
J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States
§1783, p. 661 (1833) (Story). In other words, “ ‘due
process of law’ generally implie[d] and include[d] . . .
judex [a judge], regular allegations, opportunity to answer,
and a trial according to some settled course of judicial
proceedings.” Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 280. This
constitutional baseline was designed to serve as “a restraint on
the legislative” branch, preventing Congress from “mak[ing] any
process ‘due process of law,’ by its mere will.” Id., at
276.

															C

															These three constitutional provisions were
meant to work together, and together they make quick work of this
case. In fact, each provision requires the result the Court reaches
today.

															First, because the “ ‘matter’ ”
before us is one “which, from its nature, is the subject of a suit
at the common law,” id., at 284, “the responsibility for
deciding [it] rests with Article III judges in Article III courts.”
Stern v. Marshall, 564 U.S.
462, 484 (2011). Nor does it make a difference whether we think
of the SEC’s action here as a civil-penalties suit or something
akin to a traditional fraud claim: At the founding, both kinds of
actions were tried in common-law courts. See ante, at 9–13
(discussing civil penalties); see also, e.g.,
Pasley v. Freeman, 3 T. R. 51, 100 Eng. Rep. 450
(K. B. 1789) (action for fraud); Baily v.
Merrell, 3 Bulst. 94, 81 Eng. Rep. 81 (K. B. 1615)
(same). And that tells us all we need to know that the SEC’s
in-house civil-penalty scheme violates Article III by
“withdraw[ing]” the matter “from judicial cognizance” and handing
it over to the Executive Branch for an in-house trial. Murray’s
Lessee, 18 How., at 284; see supra, at 7–8.

															Second, because the action the SEC seeks
to pursue is not the stuff of equity or admiralty jurisdiction but
the sort of suit historically adjudicated before common-law courts,
the Seventh Amendment guarantees Mr. Jarkesy the right to have his
case decided by a jury of his peers. In this regard, it is
irrelevant that the SEC derived its power to sue under a “new
statut[e]” or that the agency proceeded under “a new cause of
action.” Brief for Petitioner 13, 22 (internal quotation marks
omitted). As we have seen, the government cannot evade the Seventh
Amendment so easily. See ante, at 9; supra, at
8–10.

															Third, were there any doubt, the Due
Process Clause confirms these conclusions. Cf. Murray’s
Lessee, 18 How., at 275 (explaining that the Article III
challenge before the Court could “best be considered” as raising a
due process question). Because the penalty the SEC seeks would
“depriv[e]” Mr. Jarkesy of “property,” Amdt. 5, due process demands
nothing less than “the process and proceedings of the common law,”
3 Story §1783, at 661. That means the regular course of trial
proceedings with their usual protections, see Murray’s
Lessee, 18 How., at 280, not the use of ad hoc
adjudication procedures before the same agency responsible for
prosecuting the law, subject only to hands-off judicial review, see
supra, at 10–11.

															III

															A

															The government resists these conclusions. As
the government sees it, this case implicates the so-called public
rights exception. One that defeats not only Mr. Jarkesy’s right to
trial by jury, but also his right to proceed before an independent
trial judge consistent with traditional judicial processes. That
is, on the government’s account, not only does the Seventh
Amendment fall away; so does the usual operation of Article III and
the Due Process Clause.

															In the government’s view, the public rights
exception “at a minimum allows Congress to create new
statutory obligations, impose civil penalties for their violation,
and then commit to an administrative agency the function of
deciding whether a violation has in fact occurred.” Brief for
Petitioner 21 (emphasis added; internal quotation marks omitted).
Put plainly, all that need be done to dispense almost entirely with
three separate constitutional provisions is an Act of Congress
creating some new statutory obligation. And, the government
continues, this case easily meets that standard because the
proceeding against Mr. Jarkesy is one “brought by the government
against a private party” under a statute designed “to remedy harm
to the public at large.” Id., at 24 (internal quotation
marks omitted).

															The Court rightly rejects these arguments. See
ante, at 19–21. No one denies that, under the public rights
exception, Congress may allow the Executive Branch to resolve
certain matters free from judicial involvement in the first
instance. Ante, at 6, 14–15. But, despite its misleading
name, the exception does not refer to all matters brought by
the government against an individual to remedy public harms, or
even all those that spring from a statute. See ante, at
16–17. Instead, public rights are a narrow class defined and
limited by history. As the Court explains, that class has
traditionally included the collection of revenue, customs
enforcement, immigration, and the grant of public benefits.
Ante, at 15–17.

															How did these matters find themselves
categorized as public rights? Competing explanations abound. Some
have pointed to ancient practical considerations. In Murray’s
Lessee, for example, the Court reasoned that the “[i]mperative
necessity” of tax collection for a functional state had long caused
governments to treat “claims for public taxes” differently from
“all others.” 18 How., at 282. Others have theorized that “the core
of the judicial power” concerns the disposition of the “three
‘absolute’ rights” “to life, liberty, and property.” Wellness
Int’l Network, Ltd. v. Sharif, 575
U.S. 665, 713–714 (2015) (Thomas, J., dissenting). Public
rights, the theory goes, involve matters originally understood to
fall outside this core. Id., at 714. So, for example,
“[a]lthough Congress could authorize executive agencies to dispose
of public rights in land—often by means of adjudicating a
claimant’s qualifications for a land grant under a statute—the
United States had to go to the courts if it wished to revoke” that
grant, which had become the owner’s private property. Id.,
at 715. There are still other theories yet. See,
e.g., Stern, 564 U. S., at 489.

															Whatever their roots, traditionally recognized
public rights have at least one feature in common: a serious and
unbroken historical pedigree. See Culley v. Marshall,
601 U.S. 377, 397–398 (2024) (Gorsuch, J., concurring);
ante, at 14–17. For good reason. If the Article III
“judicial Power” encompasses “the stuff of the traditional actions
at common law tried by the courts of Westminster in 1789,”
ante, at 14 (internal quotation marks omitted), it follows
that matters traditionally adjudicated outside those courts might
not fall within Article III’s ambit. See Stern, 564
U. S., at 504–505 (Scalia, J., concurring) (“[A]n Article
III judge is required in all federal adjudications, unless
there is a firmly established historical practice to the
contrary”). So too with the Due Process Clause. If that clause sets
customary common-law practice as the ordinary procedural baseline,
see Part II–B, supra, clear historical evidence of a
different practice might warrant a departure from that baseline,
see Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 280. That’s why this Court
has said “ ‘a process of law . . . must be taken to
be due process of law’ if it enjoys ‘the sanction of settled usage
both in England and in this country.’ ” Culley, 601
U. S., at 397 (Gorsuch, J., concurring) (quoting
Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S.
516, 528 (1884)).

															With the public rights exception viewed in this
light, the government’s invocation of it in this case cannot
succeed. Starting with a “ ‘presumption . . . in
favor of Article III courts’ ” and their usual attendant
processes, ante, at 18, we look for some “deeply rooted”
tradition of nonjudicial adjudication before permitting a case to
be tried in a different forum under different procedures,
Culley, 601 U. S., at 397 (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring). We have upheld summary procedures for customs
collection, for example, because they were consistent with both
“the common and statute law of England prior to the emigration of
our ancestors” and “the laws of many of the States at the time of
the adoption of ” the Constitution. Murray’s Lessee, 18
How., at 280; see ante, at 14–15. But when it comes to the
kind of civil-penalty suit before us, that same history points in
the opposite direction, suggesting actions of this sort belong
before an independent judge, a jury, and decided in a trial that
accords with traditional judicial procedures. Ante, at 9–13;
supra, at 11–12. Just as SEC practices themselves largely
reflected as recently as 2010.

															B

															If all that’s so, why might the government
feel comfortable invoking the public rights exception? To be fair,
much of it may have to do with this Court. Some of our past
decisions have allowed the government to chip away at the courts’
historically exclusive role in adjudicating private rights—and
juries’ accompanying role in that adjudication. This process began,
of all places, in an admiralty case.

															In Crowell v. Benson, 285 U.S.
22 (1932), this Court faced a constitutional challenge to the
Longshoremen’s and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act of 1927. The
Act directed employers to compensate employees for injuries
occurring at sea. 44Stat. 1426. The law further assigned primary
responsibility for deciding liability disputes to an Executive
Branch official, the deputy commissioner of the United States
Employees’ Compensation Commission. Id., at 1435–1437;
Crowell, 285 U. S., at 42–43. The Court acknowledged
that this regime empowered the deputy commissioner to decide in the
first instance the monetary “liability of one individual to
another.” Id., at 51. The Court recognized that this
amounted to a classic “private right” suit of the kind
traditionally tried in court. Ibid. The Court even conceded
that, under the law, the factual “findings of the deputy
commissioner, supported by evidence and within the scope of his
authority, shall be final”: An Article III court could not review
the facts anew. Id., at 46. But the Court upheld the scheme
and its limited judicial review anyway.

															To get there took a dash of fiction and a pinch
of surmise. From time to time, the Court observed, judges appoint
their own special “masters and commissioners” to prepare reports on
fact issues or damages. Id., at 51. These reports are
nonbinding and “essentially . . . advisory.” Ibid.
Judges themselves remain the decisionmakers. In Crowell, the
Court embraced the fiction that Executive Branch officials might
similarly act as assistants or adjuncts to Article III courts. And
because judges often adopt the proposed findings of their masters
and commissioners, the Court surmised, Article III posed no bar to
Congress taking a further step and requiring judges to treat
the findings of Executive Branch officials as essentially “final.”
Id., at 46. “To hold otherwise,” the Court reasoned, “would
be to defeat the obvious purpose of the legislation”: “to furnish a
prompt, continuous, expert, and inexpensive method for dealing with
a class of questions of fact which are peculiarly suited to
examination and determination by an administrative agency specially
assigned to that task.” Ibid.

															Crowell itself only went so far, however.
The case fell within federal courts’ admiralty jurisdiction, and
tribunals sitting in admiralty in England and America alike had
long heard certain matters falling within the public rights
exception. See Culley, 601 U. S., at 398
(Gorsuch, J., concurring). In deciding those matters, courts
had long tolerated some flexibility in procedures, had long
restricted appellate review of factual findings, and had always
proceeded without a jury. Crowell, 285 U. S., at 45,
53.

															Soon, though, none of that mattered. Almost in a
blink, the admiralty limitation was discarded, and more and more
agencies began assuming adjudicatory functions previously reserved
for judges and juries, employing novel procedures that sometimes
bore faint resemblance to those observed in court. Along the way,
prominent voices in and out of government expressed concern at this
development. Consider just two typical examples. Were an agency
endowed with the power to assess civil penalties, advised a
committee overseen by Attorney General (soon-to-be Justice) Robert
H. Jackson, “the aggrieved person” should at least “be permitted
review de novo by a Federal district court.” Final Report of
Attorney General’s Committee on Administrative Procedure 147
(1941). That was the only way, the committee opined, “to resolve
any doubts concerning the constitutionality of the procedure.”
Ibid. Around the same time, a committee of the American Bar
Association led by Roscoe Pound sounded a similar alarm.
Administrative agencies, the committee warned, had a “tendency to
mix up rule making, investigation, prosecution, the advocate’s
function, the judge’s function, and the function of enforcing the
judgment, so that the whole proceeding from end to end is one to
give effect to a complaint.” Report of the Special Committee on
Administrative Law, 63 Ann. Rep. 331, 351 (1938).

															The high-water mark of the movement toward
agency adjudication may have come in 1977 in Atlas Roofing
Co. v. Occupational Safety and Health Review Comm’n,
430 U.S.
442. Some have read that decision to suggest the category of
public rights might encompass pretty much any case arising under
any “ ‘new statutory obligations,’ ” Brief for Petitioner
22 (quoting Atlas Roofing, 430 U. S., at 450). It is a
view the government essentially espouses in this case. But without
reference to any constitutional text or history to guide what does
or does not qualify as a public right, that view has
(unsurprisingly) proven wholly unworkable.

															It did not take long for this Court to realize
as much. Just 12 years later, in Granfinanciera, S. A.
v. Nordberg, 492 U.S.
33 (1989), this Court cabined Atlas Roofing so narrowly
that the author of Atlas Roofing complained that the Court
had “overrul[ed]” it. 492 U. S., at 71, n. 1 (White, J.,
dissenting); see ante, at 23, n. 3. Far from endorsing
the notion that any new statutory obligation could qualify for
treatment as a public right, for example, the Court in
Granfinancieria read Atlas Roofing as having “left
the term ‘public rights’ undefined.” 492 U. S., at 51,
n. 8. And since then this Court has, in one case after
another, “adhere[d]” only to Atlas Roofing’s “general
teaching” that Congress may constitutionally adopt “new
statut[es] ” assigning matters that indeed qualify as “public
rights . . . to an administrative agency.” 492
U. S., at 51 (internal quotation marks omitted); see,
e.g., Stern, 564 U. S., at 489–490;
Oil States, 584 U. S., at 345.

															Yet, even after the Court moved away from
Atlas Roofing, our public rights jurisprudence remained
muddled. Since then, the Court has suggested that public rights
might include those “involving statutory rights that are integral
parts of a public regulatory scheme.” Granfinanciera, 492
U. S., at 55, n. 10. We have changed course and tried our
hand at a five-factor balancing test. See Stern, 564
U. S., at 491 (describing Commodity Futures Trading
Comm’n v. Schor, 478 U.S.
833 (1986)). We have replaced that test with one that considers
“at least seven different” factors. 564 U. S., at 504
(Scalia, J., concurring). And at one time or another, these
factors have included the consideration of “the concerns that drove
Congress to depart from the requirements of Article III.”
Schor, 478 U. S., at 851. So, for example, we have
asked whether insistence on “the institutional integrity of the
Judicial Branch” would “unduly constrict Congress’ ability to take
needed and innovative action pursuant to its Article I powers.”
Ibid.

															Today, the Court does much to return us to a
more traditional understanding of public rights. Adhering to
Granfinancieria, the Court rejects the government’s
overbroad reading of Atlas Roofing and recognizes that the
kind of atextual and ahistorical (not to mention confusing) tests
it inspired do little more than ask policy questions the
Constitution settled long ago. Yes, a limited category of public
rights were originally and even long before understood to be
susceptible to resolution without a court, jury, or the other usual
protections an Article III court affords. But outside of those
limited areas, we have no license to deprive the American people of
their constitutional right to an independent judge, to a jury of
their peers, or to the procedural protections at trial that due
process normally demands. Let alone do so whenever the government
wishes to dispense with them.

															This Court does not subject other constitutional
rights to such shabby treatment. We have “reaffirm[ed],” many times
and “emphatically[,] that the First Amendment does not permit the
State to sacrifice speech for efficiency.” Riley v.
National Federation of Blind of N. C., Inc., 487 U.S.
781, 795 (1988). We have rejected a framework for Second
Amendment challenges that would balance the right to bear arms
against “ ‘other important governmental interests.’ ”
District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S.
570, 634 (2008). It is hornbook Fourth Amendment law that “[a]
generalized interest in expedient law enforcement cannot, without
more, justify a warrantless search.” Georgia v.
Randolph, 547 U.S.
103, 115, n. 5 (2006). And even though the Sixth
Amendment’s guarantee of a jury trial in criminal cases may have
“ ‘its weaknesses and the potential for misuse,’ ”
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S.
145, 156 (1968), we continue to insist that it “be jealously
preserved,” Patton v. United States, 281 U.S.
276, 312 (1930); see Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U.S.
83, 110–111 (2020) (plurality opinion); Erlinger, 602
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18) (“There is no efficiency
exception to the . . . Sixth Amendmen[t]”).

															Why should Article III, the Seventh Amendment,
or the Fifth Amendment’s promise of due process be any different?
None of them exists to “protec[t] judicial authority for its own
sake.” Oil States, 584 U. S., at 356 (Gorsuch, J.,
dissenting). They exist to “protect the individual.” Bond v.
United States, 564 U.S.
211, 222 (2011). And their protections are no less vital than
those afforded by other constitutional provisions. As American
colonists learned under British rule, “the right of trial” means
little “when the actual administration of justice is dependent upon
caprice, or favour, [or] the will of rulers.” 3 Story §1568, at
426; id., §1783, at 661. In recognizing as much today, the
Court essentially follows the advice of Justices Brennan and
Marshall, “limit[ing] the judicial authority of non-Article III
federal tribunals to th[o]se few, long-established exceptions” that
bear the sanction of history, and “countenanc[ing] no further
erosion.” Schor, 478 U. S., at 859 (Brennan, J., joined
by Marshall, J., dissenting).

															C

															The dissent’s competing account of public
rights is astonishing. On its telling, the Constitution might
impose some (undescribed) limits on the power of the government to
send cases “involving the liability of one individual to another”
to executive tribunals for resolution. Post, at 22 (opinion
of Sotomayor, J.). But, thanks to public rights doctrine, the
dissent insists, the Constitution imposes no limits on the
government’s power to seek civil penalties “outside the regular
courts of law where there are no juries.” Post, at 2. In
that field, the Constitution falls silent. The dissent does not
even attempt to deploy any of the contrived balancing tests that
emerged in Atlas Roofing’s aftermath to rein in the
government’s power. But where in Article III, the Seventh
Amendment, and due process can the dissent find this new rule? What
about founding-era practice or original meaning? And why would a
Constitution drawn up to protect against arbitrary government
action make it easier for the government than for private parties
to escape its dictates? The dissent offers no answers.

															To be sure, the dissent tries to appeal to
precedent. It even asserts that our decisions support, “without
exception,” its sweeping conception of public rights doctrine.
Post, at 12 (emphasis added). But the dissent’s approach to
our precedents is like a picky child at the dinner table. It
selects only a small handful while leaving much else untouched. To
start, the dissent lingers briefly on Murray’s Lessee—but
not long enough to explain the opinion’s conception of Article III,
due process, or the extended historical inquiry that led the Court
to conclude the collection of revenue concerned a public right. See
post, at 9–10; supra, at 8, 10–14.

															The 19th century behind it (for it does not
trouble with the founding era), the dissent turns to Oceanic
Steam Nav. Co. v. Stranahan, 214
U.S. 320 (1909). Drawing on that decision, the dissent contends
that “Congress [has] routinely ‘impose[d] appropriate
obligations’ ” by statute and given “ ‘executive officers
the power to enforce’ ” them “ ‘without the necessity of
invoking the judicial power.’ ” Post, at 11 (quoting
Stranahan, 214 U. S., at 339). Notably absent from the
dissent’s account, however, is the decision’s discussion of
Congress’s long-recognized and extensive authority over the field
of immigration, the area of law at issue there. See id., at
339. Unmentioned, too, is Stranahan’s explanation that what
links immigration to other public rights like “tariff[s],
. . . internal revenue, taxation,” and “foreign commerce”
is that, “ ‘from the beginning[,] Congress has exercised a
plenary power’ ” over them “because they all relate to
subjects peculiarly within the authority of the legislative
department.” Id., at 334, 339.

															Really, one has to wonder: If the public rights
exception is as broad and unqualified as the dissent asserts, why
did our predecessors bother to discuss history or Congress’s
peculiar powers when it comes to revenue and immigration? Why
didn’t the Court simply announce the rule the dissent would have us
announce today: that our Constitution does not stand in the way of
“agency adjudications of statutory claims . . . brought
by the Government in its sovereign capacity”? Post, at 4.
The answer, of course, is that the Constitution has never
countenanced the dissent’s notion that the Executive is free to
reassign virtually any civil case in which it is a party to its own
tribunals where its own employees decide cases and inconvenient
juries and traditional trial procedures go by the boards.

															That my dissenting colleagues plow ahead anyway
with their remarkable conception of public rights is all the more
puzzling considering how regularly they have argued against
that sort of sweeping concentration of governmental power. The
dissenters have recognized that a “lack of standardized procedural
safeguards” can leave government enforcement schemes “vulnerable to
abuse” and individuals subject to coercive “pressure from unchecked
prosecutors.” Culley, 601 U. S., at 405, 407
(Sotomayor, J., joined by Kagan and Jackson, JJ.,
dissenting). They have contended that the Judiciary has an
affirmative obligation to supply “meaningful remedies,” trials
before judges and juries included, even when “Congress or the
Executive has [already] created a remedial process.” Egbert
v. Boule, 596 U.S. 482, 524–525 (2022) (Sotomayor, J.,
joined by, inter alios, Kagan, J., dissenting)
(internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis deleted). And like most
every current Member of this Court at one time or another, they
have acknowledged that the jury-trial right “stands as one of the
Constitution’s most vital protections against arbitrary
government.” United States v. Haymond, 588 U.S. 634,
637 (2019) (plurality opinion).

															The dissent’s conception of public rights is so
unqualified that it refuses to commit itself on the question
whether even muted forms of judicial review—such as asking
executive tribunals to muster “more than a mere scintilla” of
evidence in support of their rulings—are constitutionally required
in the essentially unbounded class of cases that fall within its
conception of public rights. See Part I, supra; post,
at 8, n. 4. Gone, too, is any role for the jury—for why would
the government ever go to court if it may more readily secure a win
before its own employees? The only attempt to mitigate the havoc
its rule would wreak comes when the dissent declares that “ ‘[t]he
public-rights doctrine does not extend to . . . criminal
matters.’ ” Post, at 27, n. 9. But the dissent
does not (and cannot) explain how that fits with all else it says.
If, as the dissent insists, a public right is any “new right” that
“belongs to the public and inheres in the Government in its
sovereign capacity,” post, at 28, what could possibly better
fit the description than the enforcement of new criminal laws? See
Shinn v. Martinez Ramirez, 596 U.S. 366, 376
(2022) (“The power to convict and punish criminals lies at the
heart of the States’ residuary and inviolable sovereignty”
(internal quotation marks omitted)).[2]

															All but admitting its view has no support in
“historical practice dating back to the founding,” the dissent
chastises the Court for daring to rely on that practice to flesh
out the scope of the public rights exception. Post, at 18.
It would be so much simpler, the dissent says, to adopt its rule
permitting the government to skirt oversight by judge and jury
alike whenever it enacts a new law. And, true enough, “a principle
that the government always wins surely would be simple for judges
to implement.” United States v. Rahimi, 602
U. S. ___, ___ (2024) (Gorsuch, J., concurring) (slip
op., at 6). But looking to original meaning and historical practice
informing it is exactly how this Court proceeds in so many other
contexts where we seek to honor the Constitution’s
demands—including, notably, when we seek to ascertain the scope of
the criminal jury-trial right and the defendant’s attendant
right to confront his accusers. See Erlinger, 602
U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 19–20); Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U.S.
36, 50 (2004). What’s more, this approach has the virtue of
“keep[ing] judges in their proper lane” by “seeking to honor the
supreme law the people have ordained rather than substituting our
will for theirs.” Rahimi, 602 U. S., at ___–___
(Gorsuch, J., concurring) (slip op., at 4–5); see Crawford,
541 U. S., at 67.

															It is hard, as well, to take seriously the
dissent’s charges of unworkability and unpredictability. At least
until today, the dissenters supported procedural protections for
those in the government’s sights in civil as well as criminal
cases. What kind of protections? Often, they have argued, it
depends on a judicial balancing test. One that is “flexible,”
defies “technical conception,” lacks “fixed content,”  and
will “not always yield the same result” even when applied in
similar circumstances. Culley, 601 U. S., at 413
(opinion of Sotomayor, J.) (internal quotation marks omitted).
As we have seen, that was essentially the course some pursued, too,
when it came to the public rights exception in the fallout from
Atlas Roofing. See Part III–B, supra. But that kind
of “ ‘we know it when we see it’ ” approach to
constitutional rights, post, at 21, can hardly claim any
serious advantages when it comes to workability or
predictability.

															Failing all else, the dissent retreats to
Atlas Roofing. At least that decision, it insists, supports
its nearly boundless conception of public rights. The dissent goes
so far as to accuse the Court of undermining “stare decisis
and the rule of law,” post, at 15, and engaging in “a power
grab,” post, at 37, by failing to give Atlas Roofing
its broadest possible construction. It’s a “disconcerting”
accusation indeed, post, at 36, and a misdirected one at
that. Construed as broadly as the dissent proposes, Atlas
Roofing’s view of public rights stands as an outlier in our
jurisprudence—with no apparent support in original meaning, at odds
with prior precedent, and inconsistent with later precedent as
well. See ante, at 25, n. 4; Part III–B, supra.
Meanwhile, the Court’s alternative construction of Altas
Roofing fits far more comfortably with all those legal sources.
In that respect, the majority’s approach is of a piece with
Granfinanciera’s similar approach 25 years ago. And, more
broadly, it is of a piece with our usual practice of construing
“loose language” found in a prior judicial opinion in a way that
better conforms it to the mainstream of our precedents.
Groff v. DeJoy, 600 U.S. 447, 474 (2023)
(Sotomayor, J., concurring). As the dissenters have previously
acknowledged, that course is neither unusual nor at odds with
stare decisis. See id., at 474–475; see also
Brown v. Davenport, 596 U.S. 118, 141 (2022) (“We
neither expect nor hope that our successors will comb these pages
for stray comments and stretch them beyond their context—all to
justify an outcome inconsistent with this Court’s reasoning and
judgments”).

															Were there any doubt about the propriety of the
Court’s treatment of Atlas Roofing, consider one more
feature of the alternative the dissent proposes. In defending the
broadest possible construction of Atlas Roofing’s public
rights discussion, the dissent necessarily endorses that decision’s
exceptionally narrow conception of the Seventh Amendment. See
post, at 6. After all, as public rights expand, so too the
jury-trial right must contract. Yet Atlas Roofing’s
discussion of the jury-trial right, no less than its discussion of
public rights, is difficult to square with precedent and original
meaning.

															Recall that, from the start, the Seventh
Amendment was understood to protect that right “not merely” in
suits recognized at common law, but in “all suits which are”
of legal, as opposed to “equity [or] admiralty[,] jurisdiction.”
Parsons, 3 Pet., at 447 (emphasis added); see Part II–B,
supra. This Court repeated that understanding of the
Amendment until well into the 1970s, noting, for example, that “the
applicability of the constitutional right to jury trial in actions
enforcing statutory rights” was “a matter too obvious to be
doubted.” Curtis v. Loether, 415
U.S. 189, 193 (1974) (internal quotation marks omitted);
accord, Pernell v. Southall Realty, 416 U.S.
363, 375 (1974) (the Seventh “Amendment requires trial by jury
in actions unheard of at common law”). And the Court rejected the
notion that a statute must present “a close equivalent” to a
common-law cause of action; the jury-trial right attached, we said,
so long as the “action involve[d] rights and remedies of the sort
traditionally enforced in an action at law.” Ibid.
Atlas Roofing ignored all of that.
Instead, it suggested, “[t]he phrase ‘Suits at common law’ has been
construed to refer to cases tried prior to the adoption of
the Seventh Amendment in courts of law.” 430 U. S., at 449
(emphasis added). That cramped construction of the Seventh
Amendment was, of course, a key move in Atlas Roofing. For
without it, the Court would have been hard pressed to suggest the
public rights doctrine permits Congress to route any “ ‘new
cause of action’ ” for adjudication before agencies where
juries do not sit. Post, at 14 (quoting Atlas
Roofing, 430 U. S., at 461).

															Almost immediately, however, the Court rejected
Atlas Roofing’s analysis, not just with respect to public
rights doctrine but the Seventh Amendment, too. Returning to our
mainstream precedents, the Court reaffirmed the applicability of
the Seventh Amendment to new causes of action, first in Tull
v. United States, 481 U.S.
412 (1987), and then in Granfinanciera. See ante,
at 8–9. And by 1990, our case law had come full circle, announcing
once again what has always been true: that “[t]he right to a jury
trial includes more than the common-law forms of action recognized
in 1791.” Teamsters v. Terry, 494
U.S. 558, 564.

															Today, the Court respects and follows this
longstanding message in our Seventh Amendment precedents. The
dissent chooses another path entirely—adopting a reading of
Atlas Roofing that leads not only to an implausibly broad
construction of public rights, but to an implausibly narrow
understanding of the jury-trial guarantee as well. One wholly at
odds with precedents both old and new. Nor is the dissent shy about
its real motivation—and it has nothing to do with respect for
precedent but much more to do with a “power grab”: Holding the
government to the Constitution’s promise of a jury trial, the
dissent insists, would impose “constraints on what,” in its view,
“modern-day adaptable governance must look like.” Post, at
37. All of which, at bottom, amounts to little more than a
complaint with the Constitution’s revolutionary promise of popular
oversight of government officials—and with those judges who would
honor that promise.

															*

															People like Mr. Jarkesy may be unpopular.
Perhaps even rightly so: The acts he allegedly committed may
warrant serious sanctions. But that should not obscure what is at
stake in his case or others like it. While incursions on old rights
may begin in cases against the unpopular, they rarely end there.
The authority the government seeks (and the dissent would award) in
this case—to penalize citizens without a jury, without an
independent judge, and under procedures foreign to our
courts—certainly contains no such limits. That is why the
Constitution built “high walls and clear distinctions” to safeguard
individual liberty. Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc.,
514 U.S.
211, 239 (1995). Ones that ensure even the least popular among
us has an independent judge and a jury of his peers resolve his
case under procedures designed to ensure a fair trial in a fair
forum. In reaffirming all this today, the Court hardly leaves the
SEC without ample powers and recourse. The agency is free to pursue
all of its charges against Mr. Jarkesy. And it is free to pursue
them exactly as it had always done until 2010: In a court, before a
judge, and with a jury. With these observations, I am pleased to
concur.

Notes
1
 In many agencies,
litigants are not even entitled to have ALJs, with their modicum of
protections, decide their cases. These agencies use “administrative
judges.” Some agencies can replace these administrative judges if
they don’t like their decisions. And some of these judges may move
in and out of prosecutorial and adjudicatory roles, or move in and
out of the very industries their agencies regulate. See United
States v. Arthrex, Inc., 594 U.S. 1, 36–37 (2021)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part).
2
 The best the dissent can
do is to observe that “Article III itself prescribes that ‘[t]he
trial of all Crimes . . . shall be by Jury.’ ”
Post, at 27, n. 9 (quoting §2, cl. 3). That
response might be reassuring if the dissent’s treatment of the
Seventh Amendment didn’t supply a roadmap for working around it. On
the dissent’s telling, the Seventh Amendment can be dispensed with
at will: It applies “only in judicial proceedings,” and not
whenever the government chooses to assign a matter to its own
in-house tribunals. Post, at 5. And under that logic, there
is no apparent reason why the government could not evade Article
III’s jury-trial right just as easily, simply by choosing to route
criminal prosecutions through executive agencies.


