::decision_cite:: 22-842
::decision_name::  National Rifle Association of America v. Vullo
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–842

															_________________

															NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA,
PETITIONER v. MARIA T. VULLO

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the second circuit

															[May 30, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, concurring.

															Applying our decision in Bantam Books,
Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S.
58 (1963), the Court today explains that a “government official
cannot coerce a private party to punish or suppress disfavored
speech on her behalf.” Ante, at 11. I agree. I write
separately to stress the important distinction between government
coercion, on the one hand, and a violation of the First Amendment,
on the other.

															I

															Coercion of a third party can be the means by
which the government violates the First Amendment rights of
another. But the fact of coercion, without more, does not state a
First Amendment claim. Rather, in addition to finding that the
government has crossed a line from persuasion to coercion, courts
must assess how that coercion actually violates a speaker’s First
Amendment rights.

															Our decision in Bantam Books provides one
example of how government coercion of a third party can indirectly
bring about a First Amendment violation. As the majority explains,
ante, at 9–10, Bantam Books held that a Rhode Island
commission’s efforts to coerce intermediary book distributors into
pulling certain publications from circulation violated the First
Amendment rights of the books’ publishers, 372 U. S., at
61–62, 66–67. Even though the state commission had not itself
“seized or banned” any books, “the threat of invoking legal
sanctions and other means of coercion, persuasion, and
intimidation” against the distributors “directly and designedly
stopped the circulation of publications in many parts of Rhode
Island.” Id., at 67–68. Essentially, the State’s threats to
third parties—the distributors—erected through private hands an
“effective state regulation . . . of obscenity.”
Id., at 69. And the government could not escape
responsibility for the distributors’ actions merely because the
commission did not itself seize any books. See id., at
66–67.

															Notably, however, the government’s coercion of
the distributors into doing its bidding was not—in and of
itself—what offended the First Amendment. Rather, by threatening
those third-party conduits of speech, the state commission had
effectively “subject[ed] the distribution of publications to a
system of prior administrative restraints” lacking the requisite
constitutional safeguards. Id., at 70. Put another way, by
exerting pressure on a third party, the State had constructed a
“system of informal censorship.” Id., at 71.

															The lesson of Bantam Books is that “a
government official cannot do indirectly what she is barred from
doing directly.” Ante, at 11. That case does not hold
that government coercion alone violates the First Amendment. And
recognizing the distinction between government coercion and a First
Amendment violation is important because our democracy can function
only if the government can effectively enforce the rules embodied
in legislation; by its nature, such enforcement often involves
coercion in the form of legal sanctions. The existence of an
allegation of government coercion of a third party thus merely
invites, rather than answers, the question whether that coercion
indirectly worked a violation of the plaintiff’s First Amendment
rights.

															II

															Whether and how government coercion of a third
party might violate another party’s First Amendment rights will
depend on the facts of the case. Indeed, under our precedents,
determining whether government action violates the First Amendment
requires application of different doctrines that vary depending on
the circumstances. Different circumstances—who is being coerced to
do what, and why—may implicate different First Amendment
inquiries.

															In Bantam Books and many cases applying
it, the coercion and First Amendment inquiries practically merge.
This is because those cases tend to follow a similar fact pattern:
The plaintiff claims that the government coerced a distributor,
purveyor, or conduit of expression—like a billboard company,
television station, or book retailer—to shut down the speech of
another party that relies on that distributor, purveyor, or conduit
to spread its message.[1]*
Coercing an entity in the business of disseminating speech to stop
disseminating someone else’s speech obviously implicates the First
Amendment, insofar as it may result in censorship similar to the
prior restraint identified in Bantam Books.

															But, in my view, that censorship theory is an
awkward fit with the facts of this case. According to the
complaint, Vullo coerced various regulated entities to cut business
ties with the National Rifle Association (NRA). See ante, at
3–5. The NRA does not contend that its (concededly unlawful)
insurance products offered through those business relationships
were themselves “speech,” akin to a billboard, a television ad, or
a book. Nor does the complaint allege that Vullo pressured the
printer of American Rifleman (a longstanding NRA periodical) to
stop printing the magazine, or coerced a convention center into
canceling the NRA’s annual meeting. See VDARE Foundation v.
Colorado Springs, 11 F. 4th 1151, 1157 (CA10 2021). In
other words, the effect of Vullo’s alleged coercion of regulated
entities on the NRA’s speech is significantly more attenuated here
than in Bantam Books or most decisions applying it. It is,
for instance, far from obvious that Vullo’s conduct toward
regulated entities established “a system of prior administrative
restraints” against the NRA’s expression. Bantam Books, 372
U. S., at 70.

															Of course, as the majority correctly observes,
none of that means that Vullo may target with impunity the NRA’s
“ ‘nonexpressive’ ” activity if she is doing so to punish
the NRA for its expression. See ante, at 17. But it does
suggest that our First Amendment retaliation cases might provide a
better framework for analyzing these kinds of
allegations—i.e., coercion claims that are not
directly related to the publication or distribution of speech. And,
fortunately for the NRA, the complaint in this case alleges both
censorship and retaliation theories for how Vullo violated the
First Amendment—theories that, in my opinion, deserve separate
analyses.

															“ ‘[A]s a general matter,’ the First
Amendment prohibits government officials from subjecting
individuals to ‘retaliatory actions’ after the fact for having
engaged in protected speech.” Houston Community College
System v. Wilson, 595 U.S. 468, 474 (2022) (quoting
Nieves v. Bartlett, 587 U.S. 391, 398 (2019)). “[A]
plaintiff pursuing a First Amendment retaliation claim must show,
among other things, that the government took an ‘adverse action’ in
response to his speech that ‘would not have been taken absent the
retaliatory motive.’ ” Wilson, 595 U. S., at 477
(quoting Nieves, 587 U. S., at 399). Although our
analysis has varied by context, see Lozman v. Riviera
Beach, 585 U.S. 87, 96–99 (2018), we have generally required
plaintiffs claiming First Amendment retaliation to “establish a
‘causal connection’ between the government defendant’s ‘retaliatory
animus’ and the plaintiff’s ‘subsequent injury,’ ”
Nieves, 587 U. S., at 398 (quoting Hartman v.
Moore, 547 U.S.
250, 259 (2006)).

															Requiring that causal connection to a
retaliatory motive is important, because “[s]ome official actions
adverse to . . . a speaker might well be unexceptionable
if taken on other grounds.” Id., at 256. In this case, for
example, analyzing causation matters because much of Vullo’s
alleged conduct, if not done for retaliatory reasons, might
otherwise be legitimate enforcement of New York’s insurance
regulations.

															How a retaliation analysis should proceed in
this case was not addressed below, so the Court rightly leaves that
question unanswered today. But, importantly, any such analysis
requires more than asking simply whether the government’s actions
crossed the threshold from permissible persuasion to impermissible
coercion. The NRA concedes that, at the very least, our
burden-shifting framework from Mt. Healthy City Bd. of Ed.
v. Doyle, 429 U.S.
274 (1977), likely applies. See Reply Brief 16–17. Should that
test govern, the NRA would have to plausibly allege that a
retaliatory motive was a “ ‘substantial’ ” or
“ ‘motivating factor’ ” in Vullo’s targeting of the
regulated entities doing business with the NRA. Mt. Healthy,
429 U. S., at 287. Vullo, in turn, could rebut that allegation
by showing that she would have taken the same action “even in the
absence of the [NRA’s] protected conduct.” Ibid.; see
Lozman, 585 U. S., at 96 (“[E]ven if retaliation might
have been a substantial motive for the board’s action, still there
was no liability unless the alleged constitutional violation was a
but-for cause of the employment termination”).

															*  *  *

															The NRA’s complaint advances both censorship
and retaliation claims, yet the lower courts in this case lumped
these claims together and ultimately focused almost exclusively on
whether Vullo’s conduct was coercive. See ante, at 6–7.
Consequently, the strength of the NRA’s claim under the Mt.
Healthy framework has received little attention thus far. On
remand, the parties and lower courts should consider the censorship
and retaliation theories independently, mindful of the distinction
between government coercion and the ways in which such coercion
might (or might not) have violated the NRA’s constitutional rights.
That analysis can and should likewise consider which First
Amendment framework best captures the NRA’s allegations in this
case. See, e.g., VDARE, 11 F. 4th, at
1159–1175 (separately analyzing censorship and retaliation
claims).

Notes
1
*See, e.g.,
Okwedy v. Molinari, 
333 F.3d 339, 340, 342–344 (CA2 2003) (per curiam)
(billboard company); R. C. Maxwell Co. v. New
Hope, 735 F.2d 85, 85–88 (CA3 1984) (same); American Family
Assn., Inc. v. City and County of San Francisco,

277 F.3d 1114, 1119–1120 (CA9 2002) (television stations);
Kennedy v. Warren, 66 F. 4th 1199, 1204–1205 (CA9
2023) (online book retailer); Penthouse Int’l, Ltd. v.
Meese, 939 F.2d 1011, 1013–1016 (CADC 1991) (convenience
stores carrying pornographic magazines); Hammerhead Enterprises,
Inc. v. Brezenoff, 707 F.2d 33, 34–38 (CA2 1983)
(department stores carrying satirical board game); VDARE
Foundation v. Colorado Springs, 11 F. 4th 1151,
1156–1157 (CA10 2021) (resort hosting advocacy group
conference).


