::decision_cite:: 22-807
::decision_name::  Alexander v. South Carolina State Conference of the NAACP
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22-807

															_________________

															THOMAS C. ALEXANDER, in his official capacity
as PRESIDENT OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA SENATE, et al., APPELLANTS
v. THE SOUTH CAROLINA STATE CONFERENCE OF THE NAACP, et
al.

															on appeal from the united states district
court for the district of south carolina

															[May 23, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, concurring in part.

															I join all but Part III-C of the Court's
opinion. The Court correctly concludes that the judgment below must
be reversed under our precedents. Although I find the analysis in
Part III-C persuasive, clear-error review is not an invitation for
the Court to “sift through volumes of facts” and “argue its
interpretation of those facts.” Easley v. Cromartie,
532 U.S.
234, 262 (2001) (Thomas, J., dissenting). The Court's searching
review of the expert reports exceeds the proper scope of
clear-error review. But, that analysis is not necessary to resolve
the case. In Part III-B, the Court explains that the District Court
failed to evaluate evidence reflecting the correlation between race
and politics with the necessary presumption of legislative good
faith. Ante, at 14-18. And, in Part III-D, it explains that
the District Court failed to properly account for the plaintiffs'
failure to produce an alternative map. Ante, at 28-29. Both
of those mistakes are reversible legal errors.

															I write separately to address whether our
voting-rights precedents are faithful to the Constitution. This
case is unique because it presents solely constitutional questions.
The plaintiffs do not rely on the Voting Rights Act of 1965 for any
of their claims. Nor do the South Carolina officials invoke the
Voting Rights Act as part of their defense. There can be no more
propitious occasion to consider the constitutional underpinnings of
our voting-rights jurisprudence.

															The plaintiffs press two distinct constitutional
claims. First, they bring a “racial gerrymandering” claim, alleging
that South Carolina drew its new Congressional District 1 to sort
black voters based on their race. To prevail on that claim under
our precedents, the plaintiffs must show that race was the
“predominant factor” in the legislature's approach to drawing the
district. Miller v. Johnson, 515
U.S. 900, 916 (1995). Second, they bring a “vote dilution”
claim, alleging that South Carolina drew District 1 to
intentionally reduce the voting strength of the district's black
residents. To prevail on that claim under our precedents, the
plaintiffs must show that District 1's design reduces “minority
voters' ability, as a group, 'to elect the candidate of their
choice.' ” Shaw v. Reno, 509
U.S. 630, 641 (1993) (quoting Allen v. State Bd. of
Elections, 393 U.S.
544, 569 (1969)).

															In my view, the Court has no power to decide
these types of claims. Drawing political districts is a task for
politicians, not federal judges. There are no judicially manageable
standards for resolving claims about districting, and, regardless,
the Constitution commits those issues exclusively to the political
branches.

															The Court's insistence on adjudicating these
claims has led it to develop doctrines that indulge in race-based
reasoning inimical to the Constitution. As we reiterated last Term,
“ '[o]ur Constitution is color-blind.' ” Students for Fair
Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of Harvard
College, 600 U.S. 181, 230 (2023) (quoting Plessy v.
Ferguson, 163 U.S.
537, 559 (1896) (Harlan, J., dissenting)). A colorblind
Constitution does not require that racial considerations
“predominate” before subjecting them to scrutiny. Nor does it
tolerate groupwide judgments about the preferences and beliefs of
racial minorities. It behooves us to abandon our misguided efforts
and leave districting to politicians.

															I

															Determining the proper shape of a district is
a political question not suited to resolution by federal courts.
The questions presented by districting claims are “
'nonjusticiable,' or 'political questions.' ” Vieth v.
Jubelirer, 541 U.S.
267, 277 (2004) (plurality opinion). We have explained that a
question is nonjusticiable when there is “ 'a lack of judicially
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving' ” the issue or
“ 'a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue
to a coordinate political department.' ” Id., at 277-278
(quoting Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S.
186, 217 (1962)).

															In Rucho v. Common Cause, 588 U.S.
684 (2019), we applied those principles to conclude that partisan
gerrymandering claims are nonjusticiable. Partisan gerrymandering
claims allege that a political map unduly favors one political
party over another. We explained that partisan gerrymandering
claims therefore present questions about how to “apportion
political power as a matter of fairness,” despite the fact that
“[t]here are no legal standards discernible in the Constitution for
making such judgments, let alone limited and precise standards that
are clear, manageable, and politically neutral.” Id., at
705, 707. We bolstered our conclusion by reference to “the Framers'
decision to entrust districting to political entities” in the
Elections Clause, Art. I, §4, cl. 1. Id., at 697, 701.
Because courts “have no commission to allocate political power and
influence in the absence of a constitutional directive or legal
standards to guide us in the exercise of such authority,” we held
that partisan gerrymandering claims are nonjusticiable. Id.,
at 721.

															The same logic demonstrates that racial
gerrymandering and vote dilution claims are also nonjusticiable. As
with partisan gerrymandering claims, the racial gerrymandering and
vote dilution claims in this case lack “judicially discoverable and
manageable standards” for their resolution. Vieth, 541 U.
S., at 277-278 (internal quotation marks omitted). And, they ask us
to address an issue—congressional districting—that is textually
committed to a coordinate political department, Congress.
Id., at 277. As a result, racial gerrymandering and vote
dilution claims brought under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth
Amendments are nonjusticiable.

															A

															Racial gerrymandering and vote dilution claims
lack “ 'judicially discoverable and manageable standards' ” for
their resolution. Id., at 277-278 (quoting Baker, 369
U. S., at 217). Both types of claims turn on questions that cannot
be answered through the kind of reasoning that constitutes an
exercise of the “judicial Power.” Art. III, §1, cl. 1. I address in
turn the reasons why each claim is unmanageable.

															1

															Racial gerrymandering claims ask courts to
reverse- engineer the purposes behind a complex and often arbitrary
legislative process. The standard developed under our precedents
“require[s] the plaintiff to show that race was the 'predominant
factor motivating the legislature's decision to place a significant
number of voters within or without a particular district.' ”
Ante, at 2 (quoting Miller, 515 U. S., at 916). In
other words, “a plaintiff must prove that the legislature
subordinated traditional race-neutral districting principles . . .
to racial considerations.” Id., at 916. The Court's focus on
legislative purpose is unavoidable because “the constitutional
violation in racial gerrymandering cases stems from the racial
purpose of state action,” not the resulting map.
Bethune-Hill v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections, 580
U.S. 178, 189 (2017) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															Divining legislative purpose is a dubious
undertaking in the best of circumstances, but the task is all but
impossible in gerrymandering cases. “Electoral districting is a
most difficult subject for legislatures,” a pure “exercise [of] the
political judgment necessary to balance competing interests.”
Miller, 515 U. S., at 915. We have therefore cautioned
courts to “be sensitive to the complex interplay of forces that
enter a legislature's redistricting calculus.” Id., at
915-916.

															In cases without smoking-gun evidence, the only
practical way to prove that a State considered race when drawing
districts is to “show that the State's chosen map conflicts with
traditional redistricting criteria.”[1] Ante, at 3. The Court's racial gerrymandering
precedents use the term “ 'traditional districting principles' ” to
refer to the “competing interests” and “complex . . . forces”
involved in drawing districts. Miller, 515 U. S., at
915-916, 919 (quoting Shaw, 509 U. S., at 647). Judging a
map's consistency or conflict with traditional districting
principles requires a court to ascertain what kinds of maps should
result from the application of those principles.

															Determining how a legislature would have drawn
district lines in a vacuum is a fool's errand. Indeed, as we have
defined them, “traditional districting principles” are simply
anything relevant to drawing districts other than race. They
include “principles such as compactness, contiguity, and respect
for political subdivisions.” Id., at 647. They also include
“keeping communities of interest together, and protecting
incumbents,” Rucho, 588 U. S., at 706-707, as well as
“minimizing change,” Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v.
Alabama, 575 U.S. 254, 259 (2015). Today, the Court
identifies “the legislature's partisan interests” as a traditional
criterion. Ante, at 19. Even considerations such as a
district's “consistently urban character,” “common media sources,”
and inclusion of “major transportation lines . . . implicate
traditional districting principles.” Bush v. Vera,
517 U.S.
952, 966 (1996) (plurality opinion). We have readily
acknowledged that “[t]raditional redistricting principles . . . are
numerous and malleable,” and that “some . . . are surprisingly
ethereal and admit of degrees.” Bethune-Hill, 580 U. S., at
190 (alteration and internal quotation marks omitted).

															To evaluate whether a map aligns with
traditional districting principles, a court must “rank the relative
importance of those . . . criteria.” Rucho, 588 U. S., at
708. Without such a ranking, it is impossible to say what kinds of
maps the principles should yield. But, that analysis ensnarls
courts in a political thicket. Traditional districting principles
often conflict with one another, and there is no principled way for
judges to resolve those conflicts. Consider the question whether
the principles of contiguity and compactness can justify a map that
retains a relatively small part of the old district's core. See
ante, at 19, 21. Or, consider whether the principle of
keeping communities of interest together can justify uniting one
community at the cost of splitting another between several
districts, or healing partially an existing split at the cost of
introducing a new one. See Allen v. Milligan, 599
U.S. 1, 57, 61 (2023) (Thomas, J., dissenting). These questions do
not ask for legal answers, only political compromises. Judicial
resolution of racial gerrymandering claims thus requires precisely
the kind of “inconsistent, illogical, and ad hoc” decisionmaking
that we have said is beyond the judicial power. Vieth, 541
U. S., at 278.

															Evaluating compliance with traditional
districting principles is further complicated by the fact that many
decisions are equally consistent with both a good-faith application
of those principles and with common gerrymandering techniques. A
legislature seeking to gerrymander a district will often proceed by
“packing” or “cracking” groups of minority voters. “Packing” means
concentrating minority voters in a single district to reduce their
influence in surrounding districts. “Cracking” means splitting a
group of minority voters between multiple districts to avoid strong
minority influence in any one district. But, in areas where
“political groups . . . tend to cluster (as is the case with
Democratic voters in cities),” apparent packing or cracking can
simply reflect “adherence to compactness and respect for political
subdivision lines” or “the traditional criterion of incumbency
protection.” Id., at 290, 298. This case exemplifies the
problem—the majority observes that Dr. Moon Duchin's report failed
to “account for” the traditional districting principles of
“partisanship or core retention” in “assessing whether the Enacted
Plan 'cracks' black voters among multiple districts.” Ante,
at 28-29. The difference between illegitimate packing and the
legitimate pursuit of compactness is too often in the eye of the
beholder.

															Perhaps the most serious obstacle to evaluating
whether a map is consistent with traditional districting principles
is the fact that race and politics are, at present, highly
correlated in American society. Racial gerrymandering is
constitutionally suspect, but “a jurisdiction may engage in
constitutional political gerrymandering.” Rucho, 588 U. S.,
at 701 (internal quotation marks omitted). So, even if a court is
able to navigate all the complications I have identified so far, it
must still contend with the reality that “political and racial
reasons are capable of yielding similar oddities in a district's
boundaries.” Cooper v. Harris, 581 U.S. 285, 308
(2017). To that end, “when the State asserts partisanship as a
defense,” plaintiffs must meet the “formidable task” of
“disentangl[ing] race from politics and prov[ing] that the former
drove a district's lines.” Ibid. Courts are not well
equipped to evaluate whether plaintiffs succeed in disentangling
race and politics.

															As the Court observes, roughly 90% of black
voters in South Carolina supported the Democratic candidate in the
last Presidential election. Ante, at 4, and n. 2. When
nearly all black voters support Democrats, an effort to
strategically sort Democratic voters can be indistinguishable from
an effort to strategically sort black voters. In this case, all
Democratic-leaning maps presented during the districting process
featured a black share of the voting-age population of 21% or
higher, and all Republican-leaning maps featured a black voter
share of 17% or lower. Ante, at 15. The dispute in this case
therefore focuses on whether that correlation reflected a racial
purpose, or merely reflected the result of a political purpose.

															The majority's reasoning highlights the
difficulties inherent in disentangling race and politics. Its
explanation of why the expert evidence was insufficient does not
rest on the application of legal principles, but on the likely
errors it finds in the experts' statistical models after a “foray
into the minutiae of the record.” Cromartie, 532 U. S., at
262 (opinion of Thomas, J.). The majority discounts four separate
expert reports based on methodological concerns. One report is
insufficient because it fails to model partisanship. Ante,
at 19-21. Another “carries less weight” because it measures
partisanship through the wrong statistical method. Ante, at
25. And, another cannot be relied upon because it measures
partisanship with the wrong election data. Ante, at 26-27.
The dissent accuses the Court of “play[ing] armchair statistician.”
Post, at 31 (opinion of Kagan, J.). But, the dissent's
defense of the expert reports includes an exercise in armchair
cartography. The dissent justifies the experts' assumption that the
legislature could move any precinct in District 1 to District 6 by
explaining that District 1 is thin, coastal, and shares a long
border with District 6. Post, at 28-30. It supports its
hunch with two zoomed-out maps that include no information about
precinct size or location. Post, at 35, Appendix. This type
of back-and-forth is the inevitable result of our voting-rights
doctrine. One worries that the Court will soon begin drawing its
own sample maps and performing in-house regression analyses.

															A system in which only specialized experts can
discern the existence of a constitutional injury is intolerable,
and strongly suggests that the racial gerrymandering injury is not
amenable to judicial resolution. We should resist the temptation to
reduce the Fourteenth Amendment to a battle of expert witnesses.
Our gerrymandering misadventures demonstrate that these claims lack
judicially manageable standards.

															2

															As I have long maintained, vote dilution
claims are also “not readily subjected to any judicially manageable
standards.” Holder v. Hall, 512
U.S. 874, 901-902 (1994) (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment).
To prove vote dilution as a constitutional claim, our precedents
require plaintiffs to show that the design of a district reduces
“minority voters' ability, as a group, to elect the candidate of
their choice.” Shaw, 509 U. S., at 641 (internal quotation
marks omitted). The same consideration is used for vote dilution
claims brought under §2 of the Voting Rights Act. See Allen,
599 U. S., at 13 (explaining that §2 “borrow[s] language from a
Fourteenth Amendment [vote dilution] case”).

															To assess whether a legislature has diluted a
minority's vote, “the critical question . . . is: 'Diluted relative
to what benchmark?' ” Id., at 50 (opinion of Thomas, J.)
(quoting Gonzalez v. Aurora, 535 F.3d 594, 598 (CA7
2008) (Easterbrook, C. J.)). Despite repeated efforts in our Voting
Rights Act cases, the Court has “never succeeded” in formulating
“an objective and workable method of identifying the undiluted
benchmark.” 599 U. S., at 69 (opinion of Thomas, J.). The Court's
failure is not surprising because the task is futile. The
Constitution does not offer “a theory for defining effective
participation in representative government.” Holder, 512 U.
S., at 897 (opinion of Thomas, J.).

															Choosing among theories of effective
representation depends on particular voters' objectives and
preferred political strategies, not principles of constitutional
law. Are a minority's votes “more 'effective' when they provide
influence over a greater number of seats, or control
over a lesser number of seats”? Id., at 899. Are minority
voters “ 'represented' only when they choose a delegate who will
mirror their views in the legislative halls,” or does the
“practical influence” of a small group of potential swing voters
also amount to effective representation? Id., at 900. Only
minority voters themselves can answer these questions. No “theory
of the 'effective' vote” is “inherent in the concept of
representative democracy itself.” Id., at 899. So, when our
precedents ask a court to determine if a minority's vote is
diluted, they are “actually ask[ing]” the court “ 'to choose among
competing bases of representation—ultimately, really, among
competing theories of political philosophy.' ” Id., at 897
(quoting Baker, 369 U. S., at 300 (Frankfurter, J.,
dissenting)). The Constitution expresses no view on such issues,
and they are not amenable to judicial resolution.

															In practice, this Court has endorsed a theory of
representation that distributes legislative seats in direct
proportion to racial demographics. “[T]he 'lack of any better
alternative' identified in our case law” and the “intuitive appeal”
of “direct proportionality” make a racial proportionality standard
irresistible. Allen, 599 U. S., at 72 (opinion of Thomas,
J.) (quoting Holder, 512 U. S., at 937 (opinion of Thomas,
J.)). As a result, there is a “near-perfect correlation between
[courts'] proportionality findings and [vote dilution] liability
results.” 599 U. S., at 72 (citing E. Katz, M. Aisenbrey, A.
Baldwin, E. Cheuse, & A. Weisbrodt, Documenting Discrimination
in Voting: Judicial Findings Under Section 2 of the Voting Rights
Act Since 1982, 39 U. Mich. J. L. Reform 643, 730-732 (2006)). A
proportionality approach is easy to apply, but it is “radically
inconsistent with the [Reconstruction] Amendments' command that
government treat citizens as individuals and their 'goal of a
political system in which race no longer matters.' ” 599 U. S., at
82 (quoting Shaw, 509 U. S., at 657).

															I continue to believe that “[t]he matters the
Court has set out to resolve in vote dilution cases are . . . not
questions of law,” and that “they are not readily subjected to any
judicially manageable standards.” Holder, 512 U. S., at
901-902 (opinion of Thomas, J.). The Court's determination to
nonetheless adjudicate these cases has yielded an unconstitutional
practice of distributing of political power based on race.

															B

															Racial gerrymandering and vote dilution
claims—at a minimum, those challenging congressional districts—are
nonjusticiable for an additional reason: The Elections Clause makes
a “textually demonstrable constitutional commitment” of the power
to oversee congressional districting to “a coordinate political
department,” Congress. Vieth, 541 U. S., at 277 (internal
quotation marks omitted). And, no other constitutional provision
overcomes that commitment to Congress. The Constitution
contemplates no role for the federal courts in the districting
process.

															1

															Although States have the initial duty to draw
district lines, the Elections Clause commits exclusive supervisory
authority over the States' drawing of congressional districts to
Congress—not federal courts. It provides: “The Times, Places and
Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall
be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the
Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such Regulations,
except as to the Places of chusing Senators.” Art. I, §4, cl. 1.
The first part of the Clause “imposes a duty upon” state
legislatures to “prescribe the details necessary to hold
congressional elections.” U. S. Term Limits, Inc. v.
Thornton, 514 U.S.
779, 862 (1995) (Thomas, J., dissenting). The second part
“grants power exclusively to Congress” to police the state
legislatures' performance of their duty. Id., at 864.
Critically, the Clause leaves the Judiciary out of the districting
process entirely.

															The Clause's assignment of roles is
comprehensive. For example, a state legislature's responsibility
over congressional elections “ 'transcends any limitations sought
to be imposed by the people of a State' ” through other state
actors; the state legislature is the exclusive state
authority. Moore v. Harper, 600 U.S. 1, 58 (2023)
(Thomas, J., dissenting) (quoting Leser v. Garnett,
258 U.S.
130, 137 (1922)). In a similar vein, the Clause makes Congress
the exclusive federal authority over States' efforts to draw
congressional districts, to the exclusion of courts.

															The historical record compels this
interpretation of the Elections Clause's text. Gerrymandering and
vote dilution are not new phenomena. The founding generation was
familiar with political districting problems from the American
colonial experience. See Vieth, 541 U. S., at 274
(collecting examples). But, the Framers nowhere suggested the
federal courts as a potential solution to those problems. Instead,
they relied on congressional oversight. The Framers' considered
choice of a nonjudicial remedy is highly relevant context to the
interpretation of the Elections Clause. See New York State Rifle
& Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 26-27
(2022).

															Because the Elections Clause attracted
considerable criticism during the ratification debates, ample
contemporaneous discussion sheds light on the original
understanding of the Clause. As a delegate to the Virginia
ratifying convention observed, Congress's power to regulate the
time, place, and manner of elections drew objections that “echoed
from one end of the continent to the other.” 3 Debates on the
Constitution 9 (J. Elliot ed. 1836) (Elliot's Debates). Opponents
of ratification attacked the Clause as a radical expansion of
national power and a grave danger to liberty. Patrick Henry argued:
“What can be more defective than the clause concerning the
elections? The control given to Congress over the time, place, and
manner of holding elections, will totally destroy the end of
suffrage.” Id., at 60.

															Defenses of the Elections Clause demonstrate
that it was designed at least in part as a way to address abusive
districting. To be sure, proponents of ratification primarily
justified the Clause as a “constitutional remedy for th[e] evil”
presented by the possibility that “the states [might] neglect to
appoint representatives” to the new Federal Government. 2
id., at 326 (statement of John Jay). But, other defenses of
the Elections Clause resonate with modern concerns about
gerrymandering and vote dilution.

															Some proponents of ratification championed the
Clause as necessary “for securing to the people their equal rights
of election.” Id., at 26. A delegate to the Massachusetts
ratifying convention cautioned that “a state legislature . . . in
times of popular commotion, and when faction and party spirit run
high, . . . might make an unequal and partial division of the
states into districts for the election of representatives.”
Id., at 27. In such a situation, he explained, “the people
can have no remedy” except for that created by the Elections
Clause: the “controlling power” by which Congress may “preserve and
restore to the people their equal and sacred rights of election.”
Ibid. And, James Madison raised similar arguments at the
Constitutional Convention. See 2 Records of the Federal Convention
of 1787, pp. 240-241 (M. Farrand ed. 1911).

															It was Congress, not the courts, that the
Founders contemplated would provide recourse against state
intrusions on voting rights through the districting process. Even
when listing all entities that could possibly
regulate congressional elections, the founding generation did not
consider the federal courts. To support his assertion that “the
discretionary power over elections ought to exist somewhere,”
Alexander Hamilton posited that “there were only three ways
in which this power could have been reasonably organized; that it
must either have been lodged wholly in the National Legislature, or
wholly in the State Legislatures, or primarily in the latter, and
ultimately in the former.” The Federalist No. 59, p. 326 (E. Scott
ed. 1898) (emphasis added). A delegate made the same observation at
the Massachusetts ratifying convention: “The power . . . to
regulate the elections of our federal representatives must be
lodged somewhere. I know of but two bodies wherein it can be
lodged—the legislatures of the several states, and the general
Congress.” 2 Elliot's Debates 24.

															The Elections Clause's text and history
therefore point to the same conclusion: The Clause commits
supervisory authority over congressional districting to Congress
alone. “At no point” during the drafting or ratification of the
Constitution “was there a suggestion that the federal courts had a
role to play” in resolving “electoral districting problems.”
Rucho, 588 U. S., at 699. Even when the debate touched on
how political districting could affect the voting rights of
individuals, it was understood that any remedy related to
districting would come from Congress, not federal courts.[2]

															2

															None of the Constitution's other provisions
undercuts or countermands the Elections Clause's clear mandate for
Congress to supervise the States' districting efforts. The Court
has viewed the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments as the source of
its authority to entertain challenges to districts. But, the
Reconstruction Amendments are perfectly consistent with Congress's
exclusive authority to oversee congressional districting.

															Our decisions primarily identify the Equal
Protection Clause as the textual basis for judicial resolution of
districting claims. See Shaw, 509 U. S., at 642;
Davis v. Bandemer, 478 U.S.
109, 151 (1986) (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment)
(asserting that, in contrast to political gerrymandering, “the
greater warrant the Equal Protection Clause gives the federal
courts to intervene for protection against racial discrimination .
. . render[s] racial gerrymandering claims justiciable”). That
conclusion does not comport with the text of the Equal Protection
Clause or the structure of the Reconstruction Amendments.

															The text of the Equal Protection Clause makes it
an unlikely source for claims about political districting. The
Equal Protection Clause provides that “[n]o State shall . . . deny
to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws.” Amdt. 14, §1. The Clause's “focus on 'protection' ” suggests
that it imposes only “ 'a duty on each state to protect all persons
and property within its jurisdiction from violence and to enforce
their rights through the court system,' ” not a “prohibit[ion on]
discriminatory legislative classifications.” United States
v. Vaello Madero, 596 U.S. 159, 178-179, n. 4 (2022)
(Thomas, J., concurring) (quoting C. Green, The Original Sense of
the (Equal) Protection Clause: Pre-Enactment History, 19 Geo. Mason
U. Civ. Rights L. J. 1, 3 (2008)). So understood, the Equal
Protection Clause has no obvious bearing on districting.[3]

															Reading the Equal Protection Clause—or anything
else in §1 of the Fourteenth Amendment—to invite judicial
involvement in disputes over voting rights also ignores the fact
that another part of the Fourteenth Amendment deals directly with
those rights. Section 2 provides that “when the right to vote . . .
is denied” to a State's voting-age male citizens “or in any way
abridged,” the State's apportionment of congressional
representatives “shall be reduced in the proportion” of the denial
of the franchise. Congress alone can provide that remedy through
its power to apportion representatives among the States. See Art.
I, §2, cl. 3. Federal courts are therefore unable to enforce §2.
See Saunders v. Wilkins, 152 F.2d 235 (CA4), cert.
denied, 328 U.S. 870 (1945). The express provision of a nonjudicial
remedy for voting-rights violations in §2 counsels against reading
§1 to allow judicial remedies implicitly in those same
voting-rights disputes. Cf. Reynolds v. Sims,
377
U.S. 533, 594 (1964) (Harlan, J., dissenting).

															Reading the Equal Protection Clause to support
claims for racial gerrymandering or vote dilution also makes the
existence of the Fifteenth Amendment unexplainable. If §1 of the
Fourteenth Amendment allows for such fulsome protection of the
franchise by federal courts, it is hard to see why “Congress and
the States still found it necessary to adopt the Fifteenth
Amendment—which protects '[t]he right of citizens of the United
States to vote'—two years after the Fourteenth Amendment's
passage.” McDonald, 561 U. S., at 852 (opinion of Thomas,
J.).

															Nor can the Fifteenth Amendment justify racial
gerrymandering or vote dilution claims in its own right. The
Fifteenth Amendment is the primary constitutional protection for
the voting rights of racial minorities. But, the Fifteenth
Amendment “address[es] only matters relating to access to the
ballot.” Holder, 512 U. S., at 930 (opinion of Thomas, J.).
“[I]ts protections [are] satisfied as long as members of racial
minorities [can] ' “register and vote without hindrance.” ' ”
Id., at 921 (quoting Mobile v. Bolden,
446 U.S.
55, 65 (1980) (plurality opinion)). The Court's decision in
Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S.
339 (1960)—a Fifteenth Amendment case often cited as a
touchstone of our racial gerrymandering jurisprudence—is consistent
with this understanding. Gomillion involved only a claim
“that the boundaries of a city had been drawn to prevent blacks
from voting in municipal elections altogether,” not a claim about
the way minority voters were distributed between two districts.
Holder, 512 U. S., at 920, n. 20 (opinion of Thomas,
J.).

															At this juncture, I see no directive in the
Reconstruction Amendments for courts to police the lines between
political districts. Instead, the Elections Clause assigns the
responsibility for supervising the States' drawing of congressional
districts solely to Congress.

															* * *

															Racial gerrymandering and vote dilution claims
lack judicially manageable standards for their resolution. And,
they conflict with the Constitution's textual commitment of
congressional districting issues to the state legislatures and
Congress. They therefore present nonjusticiable political
questions. The Court should extricate itself from this business and
return political districting to the political branches, where it
belongs.

															II

															When an institution strays from its
competencies, one does not expect good results. This Court's
efforts in the districting field are no exception. The underlying
nonjusticiability of racial gerrymandering and vote dilution claims
leads us to distort our doctrines in numerous ways. The standard
that the Court uses to resolve racial gerrymandering claims betrays
the colorblind promise of the Fourteenth Amendment by endorsing the
notion that some racial classifications are benign. The standard
that the Court uses to resolve vote dilution claims invariably
falls back on racial stereotypes. And, the remedy commonly ordered
in redistricting cases—a judicially imposed map—ignores the normal
limits on federal equity power. Taken together, the Court's
misconceived doctrines leave the States in an unenviable
position.

															A

															The racial predominance standard for racial
gerrymandering claims is plainly inconsistent with the fact that “
'[o]ur Constitution is color-blind.' ” Harvard College, 600
U. S., at 230 (quoting Plessy, 163 U. S., at 559 (opinion of
Harlan, J.)). Ordinarily, any governmental consideration of
race—even as a second-order consideration—triggers strict scrutiny.
For example, using race merely as a “tip” or a “plus” factor in
college admissions does not excuse a university from satisfying
strict scrutiny. 600 U. S., at 195-196, 213 (internal quotation
marks omitted).

															Our voting-rights precedents diverge from this
rule by subjecting an alleged racial gerrymander to strict scrutiny
only if “race was the 'predominant factor motivating the
legislature's decision to place a significant number of voters
within or without a particular district.' ” Ante, at 2
(quoting Miller, 515 U. S., at 916) (emphasis added). A
“predominance” requirement conflicts with the classification-based
harm that racial gerrymandering claims purport to address. The
constitutional injury underlying a racial gerrymandering claim is
the legislature's mere use of a racial classification in drawing
its map. See Bethune-Hill, 580 U. S., at 189. That injury
exists whether race is a legislature's first or last consideration
in drawing districts. “Racial classifications of any sort
pose the risk of lasting harm to our society.” Shaw, 509 U.
S., at 657 (emphasis added). “They reinforce the belief . . . that
individuals should be judged by the color of their skin” and
“balkanize us into competing racial factions.” Ibid. All
racial classifications are inherently suspect, whether predominant
or not.

															The Court developed the racial predominance
standard with concerns about the justiciability of gerrymandering
claims in mind. The Court initially formulated the predominance
standard while observing that “[f]ederal-court review of
districting legislation represents a serious intrusion on the most
vital of local functions,” and stressing the need to allow States
“discretion to exercise the political judgment necessary to balance
competing interests.” Miller, 515 U. S., at 915. And, after
describing the predominance standard, the Court cautioned that
federal courts must consider the problem of racial gerrymandering
in light of “the intrusive potential of judicial intervention into
the legislative realm.” Id., at 916. These concerns about
intruding on the political process should have been a clear sign to
retreat. Instead, the Court forged ahead to adopt a
constitutionally suspect compromise.

															The racial predominance standard does not even
purport to be consistent with the colorblind Constitution. The
Miller Court simply borrowed that standard from the District
Court's flawed opinion below. The Court endorsed the District
Court's decision “to require strict scrutiny whenever race is the
'overriding, predominant force' in the redistricting process.”
Id., at 909, 917 (quoting Johnson v. Miller,
864 F. Supp. 1354, 1372 (SD Ga. 1994)). But, the District Court's
opinion could not have been a stronger rejection of our colorblind
Constitution. It acknowledged that the racial predominance standard
allowed legislatures to “intentionally consider race in
redistricting—and even alter the occasional line in keeping with
that consideration—without incurring constitutional review.”
Id., at 1373. But, the District Court reasoned, “[b]oth the
Supreme Court and Congress have already admitted that the
Constitution is not genuinely 'color-blind.' ” Id., at 1374.
This provenance underscores the inconsistency of the racial
predominance standard with our colorblind Constitution.

															Any use of race in drawing political
districts—no matter how minor—must be justified by a compelling
interest. The Court's insistence on hearing nonjusticiable
districting claims leads it to disregard that principle in favor of
a distorted standard that legitimizes racial classifications. If
the Court is truly concerned about intruding on the political
process, it should acknowledge that districting is a political
question and vacate the field.

															B

															The Court's standard for vote dilution claims
is similarly flawed, because it requires judges to engage in racial
stereotyping. As I have explained, the Constitution does not define
a baseline of effective representation by which to evaluate the
dilution of a vote. Supra, at 9-11. The Court has purported
to fill that gap by looking to “minority voters' ability, as a
group, 'to elect the candidate of their choice.' ” Shaw, 509
U. S., at 641 (quoting Allen, 393 U. S., at 569). Simply
put, the lack of a manageable vote dilution standard has led the
Court to fall back on generalized expectations about members of
minority groups.

															“Our constitutional history does not tolerate
[the] choice” to treat as “the touchstone of an individual's
identity . . . the color of their skin.” Harvard College,
600 U. S., at 231. It therefore does not permit courts to make
judgments about what candidate “minority voters as a group” would
choose. That assessment requires a court to assume that “members of
racial and ethnic groups must all think alike on important matters
of public policy.” Holder, 512 U. S., at 903 (opinion of
Thomas, J.). And, it requires a court to construct a caricature of
the racial group to determine—in the abstract—the attributes that
define “the candidate of its choice.” The Constitution does not
indulge the belief that members of racial minorities “always (or
even consistently) express some characteristic minority viewpoint
on any issue.” Harvard College, 600 U. S., at 219 (internal
quotation marks omitted).

															The racial stereotyping encouraged by our vote
dilution precedents is pronounced here. To establish vote dilution,
the plaintiffs point to the District Court's observation that
recent elections in the district “ 'were close, with less than one
percent separating the candidates,' so increasing the district's
Black population to 20% 'would produce a “toss up” district' ”
instead of a Republican one. Brief for Appellees 64. But, that
reasoning simply equates the ability of black South Carolinians to
elect the candidate of their choice with their ability to elect a
Democrat—an exercise in racial stereotyping. The mere fact that
“members of a racial group tend to prefer the same candidates” is
not license to treat that correlation as an absolute truth.
Holder, 512 U. S., at 904 (opinion of Thomas, J.).
Plaintiffs make no effort to explore whether the affinity of the
district's black population toward the Democratic Party “might be
the product of similar socioeconomic interests rather than some
other factor related to race.” Ibid. They instead proceed on
the “working assumption that racial groups can be conceived of
largely as political interest groups.” Id., at 905. The
Constitution forbids such an assumption.

															The plaintiffs' stereotyping does not stop
there. They contend that their vote dilution claim also finds
support in an expert report evaluating the ability of black South
Carolinians to elect the candidate of their choice. That expert
based her conclusion on the results of “elections with Black
candidates on the ballot.” Brief for Appellees 64. The plaintiffs'
argument therefore assumes that the “candidate of choice” for black
voters is simply a black candidate. But, the stereotyping is worse
than that. In 2016, South Carolina reelected Republican Tim Scott
to the United States Senate; Scott is the first black senator from
the South since Reconstruction. The plaintiffs and their expert
nonetheless decided that this race was not “considered
probative for Black electoral opportunity.” Supp. App. to Juris.
Statement 174a. Plaintiffs' argument therefore combines two
stereotypes by assuming that black South Carolinians can be
properly represented only by a black Democrat.

															Such stereotyping is, of course, not limited to
this case or black voters. For example, a District Court recently
concluded that Hispanic voters in a majority-Hispanic district
lacked an opportunity to elect the candidate of their choice, even
though the district elected a Hispanic Republican. Soto
Palmer v. Hobbs, ___ F. Supp. 3d ___, 2023 WL 5125390,
*5, *9, *12 (WD Wash., Aug. 10, 2023). The court later purported to
correct the lack of Hispanic opportunity by imposing a remedial map
that made the district “substantially more Democratic,” but
slightly less Hispanic. Soto Palmer, 2024 WL 1138939, *2, *5
(Mar. 15, 2024). In short, the court concluded that securing the
rights of Hispanic voters required replacing some of those voters
with non-Hispanic Democrats. That dismissive attitude toward
non-Democratic members of minority groups exemplifies the tendency
of the Court's race-obsessed jurisprudence to “balkanize us into
competing racial factions.” Shaw, 509 U. S., at 657. The
Court should correct course now before it inflicts further
damage.

															The vote dilution analysis in this case
inevitably reduces black Charlestonians to partisan pawns and
racial tokens. The analysis is demeaning to the courts asked to
perform it, to say nothing of the black voters that it stereotypes.
“The assumptions upon which our vote dilution decisions have been
based should be repugnant to any nation that strives for the ideal
of a color-blind Constitution.” Holder, 512 U. S., at
905-906 (opinion of Thomas, J.).

															C

															The Court's insistence on adjudicating racial
gerrymandering and vote dilution claims has also tempted it to
ignore constitutional limits on its remedial powers. Ultimately,
the only remedy for the constitutional injuries caused by an
illegally drawn map is a new map. But, federal courts lack “the
power to create remedies previously unknown to equity
jurisprudence.” Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo, S. A. v.
Alliance Bond Fund, Inc., 527 U.S.
308, 332 (1999). And, there is no “indication that the Framers
had ever heard of courts” playing any role in resolving electoral
districting problems. Rucho, 588 U. S., at 699. The power to
redraw a States' electoral districts therefore exceeds “the
jurisdiction in equity exercised by the High Court of Chancery in
England at the time of the adoption of the Constitution and the
enactment of the original Judiciary Act.” Grupo Mexicano,
527 U. S., at 318 (internal quotation marks omitted).

															The Court once recognized its limited equitable
powers in this area. We previously acknowledged that “[o]f course
no court can affirmatively re-map [a State's] districts so as to
bring them more in conformity with the standards of fairness for a
representative system. At best we could only declare the existing
electoral system invalid.” Colegrove v. Green,
328 U.S.
549, 553 (1946) (opinion of Frankfurter, J.); see also
Baker, 369 U. S., at 328 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting)
(“Surely a Federal District Court could not itself remap the
State”).

															The view of equity required to justify a
judicial map-drawing power emerged only in the 1950s. The Court's
“impatience with the pace of desegregation” caused by resistance to
Brown v. Board of Education, 347
U.S. 483 (1954), “led us to approve . . . extraordinary
remedial measures,” Missouri v. Jenkins, 515 U.S.
70, 125 (1995) (Thomas, J., concurring). In the follow-on case
to Brown, the Court considered “the manner in which relief
[was] to be accorded” for vindication of “the fundamental principle
that racial discrimination in public education is
unconstitutional.” Brown v. Board of Education,
349 U.S.
294, 298 (1955) (Brown II). In doing so, the Court took
a boundless view of equitable remedies, describing equity as being
“characterized by a practical flexibility in shaping its remedies
and by a facility for adjusting and reconciling public and private
needs.” Id., at 300 (footnote omitted). That understanding
may have justified temporary measures to “overcome the widespread
resistance to the dictates of the Constitution” prevalent at that
time, but, as a general matter, “[s]uch extravagant uses of
judicial power are at odds with the history and tradition of the
equity power and the Framers' design.” Jenkins, 515 U. S.,
at 125-126 (opinion of Thomas, J.). Federal courts have the power
to grant only the equitable relief “traditionally accorded by
courts of eq-uity,” not the flexible power to invent whatever new
remedies may seem useful at the time. Grupo Mexicano, 527 U.
S., at 319.

															Redistricting remedies rest on the same
questionable understanding of equitable power. No court has
explained where the power to draw a replacement map comes from, but
all now assume it may be exercised as a matter of course. The most
consideration this Court has given to the question, if it can be
called consideration, was in Reynolds v. Sims,
377 U.S.
533. In that case, the Court foreswore any attempt to “consider
. . . the difficult question of the proper remedial devices which
federal courts should utilize in state legislative reapportionment
cases,” but nonetheless upheld, as an act of “proper judicial
restraint,” the District Court “ordering its own temporary
reapportionment plan.” Id., at 585-586. The Court's only
support for that conclusion was the naked statement in Justice
Douglas's Baker concurrence that “ 'any relief accorded can
be fashioned in the light of well-known principles of equity.' ”
Reynolds, 377 U. S., at 585 (quoting 369 U. S., at 250).
Douglas's statement is an obvious fallback to the “practical
flexibility” extolled as a “traditional attribut[e] of equity
power” in Brown II. 349 U. S., at 300. The explanation is
wholly inadequate; the Court has never attempted to ground the
map-drawing power in “the jurisdiction in equity exercised by the
High Court of Chancery in England” in 1789. Grupo Mexicano,
527 U. S., at 318 (internal quotation marks omitted).

															The lack of a historically grounded map-drawing
remedy is an enormous problem for districting claims, because no
historically supportable remedy can correct an improperly drawn
district. The most promising option is “[t]he negative injunction
remedy against state officials countenanced in Ex parte
Young,” a “standard tool of equity that federal courts have
authority to entertain under their traditional equitable
jurisdiction.” Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson, 595
U.S. 30, 53 (2021) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also
Ex Parte Young, 209 U.S.
123 (1908). The Court has “long held that federal courts may in
some circumstances grant injunctive relief against state officers
who are violating, or planning to violate, federal law.”
Armstrong v. Exceptional Child Center, Inc.,
575 U.S.
320, 326 (2015).

															But, a negative-injunction remedy does not
actually redress racial gerrymandering or vote dilution, for two
reasons. First, it is not apparent that an Ex parte Young
injunction can prevent a state election official from conducting an
election under an unconstitutional map, or force him to draw a new
map. Such an injunction “permits a party to assert in equity a
defense that would otherwise have been available in the State's
enforcement proceedings at law,” and it “extends no further than
permitting private parties in some circumstances to prevent state
officials from bringing an action to enforce a state law that is
contrary to federal law.” Whole Woman's Health, 595 U. S.,
at 53 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (alteration and internal quotation
marks omitted). It is thus not clear that such an injunction could
stop an election. Second, even if it is possible to enjoin state
officials from conducting an election, it is questionable whether
that remedy is ever “equitable.” Our system of government depends
on regular elections; putting elections indefinitely on hold may do
more harm than good. Cf. Baker, 369 U. S., at 327 (opinion
of Frankfurter, J.) (“An injunction restraining a general election
unless the legislature reapportions would paralyze the critical
centers of a State's political system and threaten political
dislocation whose consequences are not foreseeable”). Ultimately,
to remedy racial gerrymandering or vote dilution, someone must draw
a new map. I can find no explanation why that “someone” can be a
federal court.

															D

															The Court's attempts to adjudicate the
impossible have put the States in an untenable position. We have
hesitated to subject States to the “ ' “competing hazards of
liability” ' ” that arise from the fact that the Constitution
“restricts consideration of race and the [Voting Rights Act]
demands consideration of race.” Abbott v. Perez, 585
U.S. 579, 587 (2018) (quoting Vera, 517 U. S., at 977
(plurality opinion)). But, the lack of manageable standards for
districting claims and the unfortunate trajectory of the Court's
Voting Rights Act precedents combine to make it impossible for
States to navigate these hazards.

															Last Term, the Court held that the Voting Rights
Act required Alabama to draw a map that would give black Alabamians
a majority in two of the State's seven congressional districts.
Because black Alabamians make up less than two-sevenths of the
State's population, such a map could result only from an obsessive
focus on race in the map-drawing process. See Allen, 599 U.
S., at 56 (opinion of Thomas, J.). For example, one of the
plaintiffs' experts used a race-neutral algorithm to generate 2
million random maps; not a single map yielded two majority-black
districts. Id., at 58-59. In this case, however, South
Carolina faced a real risk of constitutional liability based on
allegations that it considered race too heavily in drawing a
district that was 17% black instead of 20%.

															In fact, the Court recently granted emergency
relief after a State failed to thread the impossible needle created
by our voting-rights precedents. Voters in Louisiana challenged the
State's 2022 congressional map, arguing that “Louisiana was
required under the Voting Rights Act to create a second
black-majority district.” Robinson v. Ardoin, 86 F.
4th 574, 585 (CA5 2023). The Fifth Circuit concluded that the
plaintiffs were likely to succeed on their Voting Rights Act claim.
Louisiana argued that, under the Voting Rights Act, “the
possibility of drawing a majority-minority district does not
require the drawing of the district,” but the court pointed to our
decision in Allen to reject that contention. 86 F. 4th, at
599. Louisiana then held a special legislative session and adopted
a new map that “established a second majority-Black congressional
district to resolve the [Voting Rights Act] litigation.”
Callais, v. Landry, ___ F. Supp. 3d ___, 2024 WL
1903930, *1 (WD La., Apr. 30, 2024). The result? A different group
of voters brought constitutional gerrymandering and vote-dilution
claims against the State. Id., at *6-*7. That suit was also
successful. A District Court found that race predominated in
Louisiana's process of adding the second majority-minority
district, and enjoined the use of the new map. Id., at *17,
*24. After the State argued that the proximity of the District
Court's order to important election deadlines would cause “election
chaos,” Emergency Application in No. 23A1002, p. 19, we stayed the
order, Order in No. 23A1002, 601 U. S. ___ (2024) (citing
Purcell v. Gonzalez, 549 U.S. 1
(2006) (per curiam)).

															As these cases make clear, this Court's
jurisprudence puts States in a lose-lose situation. Taken together,
our precedents stand for the rule that States must consider race
just enough in drawing districts. And, what “just enough”
means depends on a federal court's answers to judicially
unanswerable questions about the proper way to apply the State's
traditional districting principles, or about the groupwide
preferences of racial minorities in the State. There is no density
of minority voters that this Court's jurisprudence cannot turn into
a constitutional controversy. We have extracted years of litigation
from every districting cycle, with little to show for it. The
Court's involvement in congressional districting is unjustified and
counterproductive.

															* * *

															“When, under our direction, federal courts are
engaged in methodologically carving the country into racially
designated electoral districts, it is imperative that we stop to
consider whether the course we have charted for the Nation is the
one” required by the Constitution. Holder, 512 U. S., at 945
(opinion of Thomas, J.). The Constitution provides courts no power
to draw districts, let alone any standards by which they can
attempt to do so. And, it does not authorize courts to engage in
the race-based reasoning that has come to dominate our
voting-rights precedents. It is well past time for the Court to
return these political issues where they belong—the political
branches.

Notes
1
As the Court observes, the most
common direct evidence that a State considered race in drawing a
districting plan is the State's admission that it considered race
in order to comply with our Voting Rights Act precedents.
Ante, at 3.
2
Congress has, at times, wielded
its power under the Elections Clause to impose compactness and
contiguity requirements for congressional districts. See,
e.g., Apportionment Act of 1842, ch. 47, 5 Stat. 491;
Apportionment Act of 1911, ch. 5, 37 Stat. 13. More recently, in
the Uniform Congressional District Act of 1967, Congress required
the States to use single-member congressional districts instead of
at-large elections. See Pub. L. 90-196, 81 Stat. 581, 2 U. S. C.
§2c. And, Congress created a system for addressing a State's
failure to properly redistrict following a decennial census. See
§2a(c). Some Elections Clause legislation may give rise to
justiciable controversies regarding the application of federal
statutes. Cf. Wood v. Broom, 287 U.S.
1, 8 (1932). But, constitutional districting claims are not
justiciable in and of themselves.
3
Other Clauses in §1 of the
Fourteenth Amendment fare no better. The Privileges or Immunities
Clause provides that “[n]o State shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States.” It “grants 'United States citizens a certain
collection of rights—i.e., privileges or
immunities—attributable to that status.' ” Ramos v.
Louisiana, 590 U.S. 83, 138 (2020) (Thomas, J., concurring
in judgment) (quoting McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U.S.
742, 808 (2010) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment)). And, the Citizenship Clause provides that “[a]ll
persons born or naturalized in the United States . . . are citizens
of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.” It
likely “guarantees citizens equal treatment . . . with respect to
civil rights.” Vaello Madero, 596 U. S., at 179 (opinion of
Thomas, J.). It is questionable whether the terms “privileges and
immunities” and “civil rights” were understood by the generation
that ratified the Fourteenth Amendment “to extend to political
rights, such as voting.” J. Harrison, Reconstructing the Privileges
or Immunities Clause, 101 Yale L. J. 1385, 1417 (1992). The Due
Process Clause, of course, is a nonstarter as a source for
substantive rights. See Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health
Organization, 597 U.S. 215, 330-336 (2022) (Thomas, J.,
concurring).


