::decision_cite:: 22-800
::decision_name::  Moore v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kavanaugh
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–800

															_________________

															CHARLES G. MOORE, et ux., PETITIONERS
v. UNITED STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															

															Justice Kavanaugh delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															For tax purposes, Congress has long treated some
corporations and partnerships as pass-throughs: Congress does not
tax the entity on its income, but instead attributes the
undistributed income of the entity to the shareholders or partners
and then taxes the shareholders or partners on that income. This
Court has long upheld those taxes.

															Since 1962, Congress has likewise treated
American-controlled foreign corporations as pass-throughs. That
1962 law (known as subpart F) attributes certain income, mostly
passive income, of American-controlled foreign corporations to
their American shareholders and then taxes those shareholders on
that income.

															In 2017, Congress enacted a new law that
attributes more income, including active business income, of
American-controlled foreign corporations to their American
shareholders and then taxes those shareholders on that income. The
question is whether that 2017 tax (known as the Mandatory
Repatriation Tax or MRT) is constitutional under Article I, §§8 and
9 and the Sixteenth Amendment. This Court’s longstanding precedents
establish that the answer is yes.

															I

															A

															In general, Congress taxes the income of
American business entities such as corporations and partnerships in
one of two ways.

															First, some entities such as S corporations and
partnerships are taxed on a pass-through basis. (S corporations are
corporations with 100 or fewer shareholders where the shareholders
have elected to be taxed on a pass-through basis. 26 U. S. C.
§§1361–1362.) Instead of the entity itself paying taxes, income is
attributed to the entity’s owners, such as shareholders or
partners, who then pay taxes on the income of the entity even if
the entity has not distributed any money or property to them.
§§61(a)(12), 701, 1366(a)–(c).

															Second, other entities are taxed directly on
their income. For example, some corporations file a return and pay
taxes each year just like individual taxpayers. §11(a). When a
corporation pays taxes on its income, its shareholders are
ordinarily not taxed on that income. Instead, the shareholders
typically pay taxes either when the corporation distributes money,
stock, or other property to them as a dividend or when the
shareholders sell their shares and have capital gains. §§61(a)(7),
1001. But the shareholders are not taxed on the corporate income
itself.

															Congress has devised more nuanced rules for
foreign entities such as foreign corporations. For legal and
practical reasons, Congress generally does not directly tax foreign
corporations, including American-controlled foreign corporations,
on the income that they earn outside of the United States. Instead,
Congress has imposed some taxes on income of those corporations on
a pass-through basis.

															Most notably, starting in 1962, in what is known
as subpart F of the Internal Revenue Code, Congress has treated
American-controlled foreign corporations as pass-through entities:
Subpart F attributes income of the corporation to American
shareholders, and taxes those American shareholders on that income.
26 U. S. C. §§951–952. But subpart F applies only to a
small portion of the foreign corporation’s income, mostly passive
income.

															In 2017, Congress passed and President Trump
signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. 131Stat. 2054. In a variety of
ways not relevant to this case, the Act altered the United States’
approach to international corporate taxation. The primary goal was
to encourage Americans who controlled foreign corporations to
invest earnings from their foreign investments back in the United
States instead of abroad.

															As relevant here, one piece of that intricate
and multi-faceted 2017 Act imposed a new, one-time pass-through tax
on some American shareholders of American-controlled foreign
corporations. That one-time tax addressed one of the problems that
had arisen under the old system: For decades before the 2017 Act,
American-controlled foreign corporations had earned and accumulated
trillions of dollars in income abroad that went almost entirely
untaxed by the United States. The foreign corporations themselves
were not taxed on their income. And other than subpart F, which
applies mostly to passive income, the undistributed income of those
foreign corporations was not attributed to American shareholders
for the shareholders to be taxed.

															As part of the complicated transition to a more
territorial system, the 2017 Act imposed a one-time,
backward-looking tax on that accumulated income. That
backward-looking tax is known as the Mandatory Repatriation Tax or
MRT. §965. Similar in structure to subpart F, the MRT attributed
the long-accumulated and undistributed income of
American-controlled foreign corporations to American shareholders,
and then taxed those American shareholders on their pro rata
shares of that long-accumulated income at a rate from 8 to 15.5
percent. §§965(a), (c), (d).[1]

															B

															In 2006, Charles and Kathleen Moore invested
$40,000 in an American-controlled foreign corporation that one of
their friends had started in India. In return, the Moores received
a 13-percent ownership share. The company, KisanKraft, generated a
great deal of income. But as of 2017, KisanKraft had not
distributed that income to its American shareholders, including the
Moores, meaning that neither KisanKraft nor the Moores had paid
U. S. taxes on that income.

															The MRT applied to the Moores because of their
investment in KisanKraft. By the end of the 2017 tax year, the
Moores’ pro rata share of KisanKraft’s accumulated income from
2006 to 2017 totaled about $508,000. After factoring in a deduction
that is not relevant here, the Moores declared $132,512 in income
under the MRT based on their KisanKraft shares. They owed $14,729
in taxes on that income.

															The Moores paid that amount, then sued for a
refund. They claimed that the MRT was unconstitutional for two
reasons. First, they argued that the MRT violated the Direct Tax
Clause of the Constitution because, in their view, the MRT was an
unapportioned direct tax on their shares of KisanKraft stock.
Second, they contended that the MRT violated the Due Process Clause
of the Fifth Amendment because it applied retroactively to past
income.

															The District Court dismissed the suit, and the
U. S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed. The
Court of Appeals held that the MRT constitutes a tax on income
within the meaning of the Constitution because “KisanKraft earned
significant income, and the MRT assigns only a pro-rata share of
that income to the Moores.” 36 F. 4th 930, 936–937 (2022). The
Court of Appeals also rejected the Moores’ due process claim
regarding retroactivity. Id., at 938–939.

															The Moores sought review in this Court, raising
only their Direct Tax Clause argument. This Court granted
certiorari. 599 U. S. ___ (2023).

															II

															We must decide whether the 2017 Mandatory
Repatriation Tax, or MRT, exceeds Congress’s constitutional
authority. To analyze that question, we begin with a brief review
of Congress’s taxing power under the Constitution.

															After Independence in 1776 and under the
Articles of Confederation in effect from 1781 to 1789, the Federal
Government relied primarily on contributions from the States for
revenue. The Federal Government’s expenses and needs sometimes far
outpaced the contributions that the States were willing to provide.
As George Washington famously recognized during the Revolutionary
War, reliance on the States to fund the National Government
hampered important national priorities—including the war against
the British. 12 Papers of George Washington: Revolutionary War
Series 683–687 (P. Chase & F. Grizzard eds. 2002) (letter from
Valley Forge).

															The National Government’s continuing revenue
problems under the Articles of Confederation helped prompt the
Constitutional Convention that convened in Philadelphia in the
summer of 1787. The Federalist No. 30 (A. Hamilton). The Framers
responded to the revenue problem by granting Congress an expansive
taxing power.

															Article I of the Constitution affords Congress
broad “Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and
Excises.” Art. I, §8, cl. 1. That power includes “ ‘two great
classes of’ ” taxes—direct taxes and indirect taxes.
Brushaber v. Union Pacific R. Co., 240 U.S.
1, 13 (1916).

															Generally speaking, direct taxes are
those taxes imposed on persons or property. See National
Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius,
567 U.S.
519, 570–571 (2012). As a practical matter, however, Congress
has rarely enacted direct taxes because the Constitution requires
that direct taxes be apportioned among the States. To be
apportioned, direct taxes must be imposed “in Proportion to the
Census of Enumeration.” U. S. Const., Art. I, §9, cl. 4; see also
§2, cl. 3. In other words, direct taxes must be apportioned among
the States according to each State’s population.

															So if Congress imposed a property tax on every
American homeowner, the citizens of a State with five percent of
the population would pay five percent of the total property tax,
even if the value of their combined property added up to only three
percent of the total value of homes in the United States. To pay
five percent, the tax rate on the citizens of that State would need
to be substantially higher than the tax rate in a neighboring State
with the same population but more valuable homes.

															To state the obvious, that kind of complicated
and politically unpalatable result has made direct taxes difficult
to enact. Indeed, the parties have cited no apportioned direct
taxes in the current Internal Revenue Code, and it appears that
Congress has not enacted an apportioned tax since the Civil War.
See 12Stat. 297; E. Jensen, The Taxing Power: A Reference Guide to
the United States Constitution 89 (2005).

															By contrast, indirect taxes are the
familiar federal taxes imposed on activities or transactions. That
category of taxes includes duties, imposts, and excise taxes, as
well as income taxes. U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 1;
Amdt. 16. Under the Constitution, indirect taxes must “be uniform
throughout the United States.” Art. I, §8, cl. 1. A
“ ‘tax is uniform when it operates with the same force and
effect in every place where the subject of it is found.’ ”
United States v. Ptasynski, 462 U.S.
74, 82 (1983).

															Because income taxes are indirect taxes, they
are permitted under Article I, §8 without apportionment. As this
Court has said, Article I, §8’s grant of taxing power “is
exhaustive,” meaning that it could “never” reasonably be
“questioned from the” Founding that it included the power “to lay
and collect income taxes.” Brushaber, 240 U. S., at
12–13. In 1861, Congress enacted the Nation’s first unapportioned
income tax. 12Stat. 309. The Civil War income tax was recognized as
an indirect tax “under the head of excises, duties and imposts.”
Brushaber, 240 U. S., at 15; see also Springer
v. United States, 102 U.S.
586, 598, 602 (1881).

															In 1895, however, in Pollock v.
Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co., this Court held that a tax on
income from property equated to a tax on the property itself, and
thus was a direct tax that had to be apportioned among the States.
158 U.S.
601, 627–628. The Pollock decision sparked significant
confusion and controversy throughout the United States.

															Congress and the States responded to
Pollock by approving a new constitutional amendment.
Ratified in 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment rejected Pollock’s
conflation of (i) income from property and (ii) the property
itself. The Amendment provides: “The Congress shall have power to
lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source
derived, without apportionment among the several States, and
without regard to any census or enumeration.” U. S. Const., Amdt.
16 (emphasis added).

															Therefore, the Sixteenth Amendment expressly
confirmed what had been the understanding of the Constitution
before Pollock: Taxes on income—including taxes on income
from property—are indirect taxes that need not be apportioned.
Brushaber, 240 U. S., at 15, 18. Meanwhile, property
taxes remain direct taxes that must be apportioned. See
Helvering v. Independent Life Ins. Co., 292 U.S.
371, 378–379 (1934).

															III

															With that background, we turn to the 2017
Mandatory Repatriation Tax. The MRT is not apportioned among the
States. The Government argues that the MRT is a tax on income and
therefore need not be apportioned. The Moores contend that the MRT
is a tax on property, rather than a tax on income, and that the tax
is therefore unconstitutional because it is not apportioned.

															What distinguishes income from property? The
Moores argue that income requires realization. The Moores say that
realization occurs when gains come into the taxpayer’s coffers—for
example, through wages, sales, or dividends, as distinct from
appreciation in the value of a home, stock investment, or other
property. And the Moores contend that the MRT does not tax any
income that they have realized.

															Critically, however, the MRT does tax
realized income—namely, income realized by the corporation,
KisanKraft. The MRT attributes the income of the corporation to the
shareholders, and then taxes the shareholders (including the
Moores) on their share of that undistributed corporate income.

															So the precise and narrow question that the
Court addresses today is whether Congress may attribute an entity’s
realized and undistributed income to the entity’s shareholders or
partners, and then tax the shareholders or partners on their
portions of that income. This Court’s longstanding precedents,
reflected in and reinforced by Congress’s longstanding practice,
establish that the answer is yes.[2]

															A

															Congress sometimes chooses to tax a business
entity itself on the income that the entity earns. Alternatively,
Congress sometimes elects to treat an entity as a
pass-through—attributing the entity’s undistributed income to the
shareholders or partners and then taxing the shareholders or
partners on that income. Either way, this Court has held that the
tax remains a tax on income—and thus an indirect tax that need not
be apportioned.

															In 1925, in Burk-Waggoner Oil Assn. v.
Hopkins, the Court articulated that fundamental principle.
269 U.S.
110. The case involved a tax on the income of an entity that
state law treated as a partnership. Under state law, the
partnership’s property was considered the property of the partners.
For that reason, the partnership argued that Congress had to tax
the partners on the income and could not tax the partnership.

															This Court rejected that argument. The Court
stated: “Neither the conception of unincorporated associations
prevailing under the local law, nor the relation under that law of
the association to its shareholders, nor their relation to each
other and to outsiders, is of legal significance as bearing upon
the power of Congress to determine how and at what rate the income
of the joint enterprise shall be taxed.” Id., at 114. In
other words, Congress could tax the income as it chose, taxing
either the partnership or the partners on the partnership’s
undistributed income. So the tax on the partnership was proper.

															In 1932, in Burnet v. Leininger,
the Court reiterated that principle. 285 U.S.
136. There, the Court considered “the validity” of a tax
attributing partnership income to partners. Id., at 142. The
Court again held that “Congress, having the authority to tax the
net income of partnerships, could impose the liability upon the
partnership directly,” or it could impose tax liability “upon the
individuals carrying on business in partnership.” Ibid.
(quotation marks omitted).

															Next, in 1938 in Heiner v. Mellon,
the Court again addressed a situation closely akin to the Moores’
case here—a tax on partners for the undistributed income of their
partnership. 304 U.S.
271. In that case, the partnership earned income, but state law
did not allow the partners to personally receive the income.
Nonetheless, under the relevant federal tax law, the individual
partners owed taxes on the partnership’s income. The partners
argued that Congress could not tax them on income that they did not
and could not personally receive.

															This Court upheld the tax on the partners,
reasoning that it was immaterial that the partners did not actually
receive the income earned by the partnership. The Court reaffirmed
that Congress may choose to tax either the partnership or
the partners on the partnership’s undistributed income.

															The principle articulated by this Court in
Heiner v. Mellon also applies to corporations and
their shareholders. On the same day in 1938 that the Court decided
Heiner v. Mellon, the Court also decided
Helvering v. National Grocery Co. In that case, the
Court ruled that the controlling shareholder of a corporation could
not “prevent Congress, if it chose to do so, from laying on him
individually the tax on the year’s profits.” 304 U.S.
282, 288. Citing Heiner v. Mellon, the Court
stated that Congress may tax shareholders of the corporation on the
corporation’s undistributed income, in much the same way that
Congress can tax the partners of a partnership on the partnership’s
undistributed income. 304 U. S., at 288–289.

															So by 1938, this Court’s precedents had
established a clear rule that directly contradicts the Moores’
argument in this case. That line of precedent remains good law to
this day. Indeed, since then, it has gone without serious question
in both Congress and the federal courts that Congress can attribute
the undistributed income of an entity to the entity’s shareholders
or partners, and tax the shareholders or partners on their pro rata
share of the entity’s undistributed income.

															Most notably, the courts have repeatedly invoked
that principle in upholding subpart F, which Congress enacted in
1962. Like the MRT, subpart F treats certain foreign corporations
as pass-throughs by attributing undistributed income of foreign
corporations to their American shareholders, and then taxing the
American shareholders on their pro rata shares of the income.
As the Second Circuit concluded in a leading case upholding subpart
F: The constitutional challenge to subpart F “borders on the
frivolous” in light of Heiner v. Mellon. Garlock,
Inc. v. Commissioner, 489 F.2d 197, 202–203, and
n. 5 (1973); see also Estate of Whitlock v.
Commissioner, 59 T.C. 490, 507 (1972) (The “Supreme Court’s
pronouncements have been to the effect that taxation of
undistributed current corporate income at the stockholder level
rather than at the corporate level is within the congressional
power”), aff’d in relevant part, 494 F.2d 1297, 1301 (CA10 1974)
(adopting the Tax Court’s analysis); B. Bittker & L. Lokken,
Federal Taxation of Income, Estates and Gifts ¶1.2.4 (2024) (noting
the consensus in favor of Congress’s power to tax foreign
corporations as pass-through businesses); cf. Eder v.
Commissioner, 138 F.2d 27, 28 (CA2 1943) (“In a variety of
circumstances it has been held that the fact that the distribution
of income is prevented by operation of law, or by agreement among
private parties, is no bar to its taxability”).

															In response to that dispositive line of
precedents against them, the Moores invoke the Court’s earlier 1920
decision in Eisner v. Macomber, 252 U.S.
189. The Moores argue that some language in Eisner v.
Macomber is inconsistent with the rule subsequently
established in Burk-Waggoner Oil Assn. v. Hopkins,
Heiner v. Mellon, and Helvering v. National
Grocery Co. and followed ever since by Congress and the federal
courts.

															The Moores’ reliance on Eisner v.
Macomber with respect to the attribution issue is misplaced.
Importantly, Eisner v. Macomber was not a case
about Congress’s power to attribute the income of an entity to the
entity’s shareholders or partners. Rather, the Court in
Eisner v. Macomber addressed a situation where a
corporation created and distributed additional stock to existing
shareholders. 252 U. S., at 200. The corporation distributed
the additional shares of stock in proportion to each shareholder’s
percentage of ownership. Id., at 210–211. So the actual
value of the shareholders’ total stock holdings in the corporation
did not change. Ibid.

															The question in Eisner v. Macomber
was whether the new stock was nonetheless taxable income for the
shareholders. Id., at 199. The Court said no. Id., at
212. The Court reasoned that there was no change in the value of
the shareholders’ total stock holdings in the corporation before
and after the stock distribution. Id., at 210–211. So the
new stock did not represent any kind of economic gain to the
shareholders. Ibid. And the Court further stated that income
requires realization. Id., at 207, 211–212. Yet neither the
corporation nor the shareholders had realized income from the
corporation’s creation and distribution of additional stock.
Id., at 210–213.[3]

															Separate from that analysis, the Court went on
to say in dicta that “what is called the stockholder’s share in the
accumulated profits of the company is capital, not income.”
Id., at 219. Because the corporation had already paid taxes
on its income, that statement and the surrounding discussion may
have been designed to cast doubt on the legality of double
taxation—taxing both the corporation and its shareholders on the
corporation’s undistributed income. See, e.g., Brief for
American College of Tax Counsel as Amicus Curiae 16–17;
Brief for Tax Law Center at NYU Law et al. as Amici
Curiae 6–7.

															But the Moores interpret that language in
Eisner v. Macomber to mean that a tax attributing an
entity’s undistributed income to its shareholders or partners is
not an income tax. The Moores’ reading is implausible. The Court in
Eisner v. Macomber did not purport to address
attribution, no doubt because the tax at issue there did not
attribute income of the corporation to the shareholders. And if
there were any ambiguity on that point, it was quickly eliminated
by this Court’s clear and definitive holdings in Burk-Waggoner
Oil Assn. v. Hopkins, Heiner v. Mellon,
and Helvering v. National Grocery Co. In those three
cases, unlike in Eisner v. Macomber, the Court
squarely addressed attribution—and allowed it. None of those cases
so much as mentioned Eisner v. Macomber, which is not
surprising because, to reiterate, Eisner v. Macomber
did not address attribution. So whatever else Eisner v.
Macomber might stand for, it does not proscribe attribution
and thus has no bearing on the attribution issue in this case.

															To sum up: The Court’s longstanding precedents
plainly establish that, when dealing with an entity’s undistributed
income, Congress may tax either (i) the entity or (ii) its
shareholders or partners.[4]

															B

															Consistent with this Court’s case law, Congress
has long taxed the shareholders and partners of business entities
on the entities’ undistributed income. That longstanding
congressional practice reflects and reinforces this Court’s
precedents upholding those kinds of taxes.

															In 1864, for example, Congress passed and
President Lincoln signed an income-tax law that taxed individuals
on “the gains and profits of all companies, whether incorporated or
partnership,” in which they were shareholders or partners. 13Stat.
282. In 1871, the Court upheld the constitutionality of that tax.
Collector v. Hubbard, 12 Wall. 1, 18.[5]

															In 1913, soon after the Sixteenth Amendment was
ratified, Congress enacted a new income tax on shareholders for
their share of the incomes of corporations formed or used to evade
taxes. 38Stat. 166. That 1913 law also taxed partners on each
partner’s “share of the profits of a partnership.” Id., at
169. As explained above, the Court upheld that approach to
partnership taxation in Burnet v. Leininger, 285
U. S., at 142, and Heiner v. Mellon, 304
U. S., at 280. Ever since that 1913 law and those cases, the
basic partnership-tax rule has been settled: It “is axiomatic that
each partner must pay taxes on his distributive share of the
partnership’s income without regard to whether that amount is
actually distributed to him.” United States v. Basye,
410 U.S.
441, 453 (1973).

															As new kinds of corporate entities arose,
Congress employed a similar approach. For example, in the 1918
Revenue Act, Congress decided to tax shareholders of personal
service corporations—that is, shareholders of closely held
corporations that earn most of their income from the work of their
principal owners and shareholders—“in the same manner as the
members of partnerships.” 40Stat. 1070.

															And since 1958, the Internal Revenue Code has
also taxed the shareholders of S corporations in the same way as
partnerships—by taxing the shareholders on their share of the
undistributed income of the corporation. See Bufferd v.
Commissioner, 506 U.S.
523, 524–525 (1993). S corporations are corporations with 100
or fewer shareholders where the shareholders have elected to be
taxed directly on the corporate income. 26 U. S. C. §§1361–1362. A
majority of the corporations in the United States are S
corporations, so the taxation of individual shareholders of S
corporations is widespread.

															In addition, Congress has long taxed major
American shareholders of foreign business entities on some
of the income of those entities. For example, in 1937, Congress
taxed American shareholders of foreign personal holding companies
on those companies’ undistributed income. 50Stat. 822.

															And in 1962, Congress enacted subpart F, which
remains in place to this day. 76Stat. 1006, 26 U. S. C.
§951 et seq. To reiterate, subpart F taxes American
shareholders of American-controlled foreign corporations on several
kinds of undistributed corporate income, mostly passive income.
§§951, 952, 957. And as noted above, in light of this Court’s
precedents, the Courts of Appeals have uniformly rejected
constitutional challenges to subpart F. See Garlock, 489
F. 2d, at 202–203, and n. 5 (the constitutional challenge to
subpart F “borders on the frivolous” in light of Heiner v.
Mellon); Estate of Whitlock, 494 F. 2d, at 1301.

															In short, before and after ratification of the
Sixteenth Amendment, Congress has often taxed the shareholders or
partners of a business entity on the entity’s undistributed income.
Such a “[l]ong settled and established practice” can carry “great
weight in” resolving constitutional questions—and here it reflects
and reinforces this Court’s precedents. Chiafalo v.
Washington, 591 U.S. 578, 592 (2020) (quotation marks
omitted); see also Moore v. Harper, 600 U.S. 1, 32
(2023) (The Court has “long looked to ‘settled and established
practice’ to interpret the Constitution” (quoting The Pocket
Veto Case, 279 U.S.
655, 689 (1929))); Walz v. Tax Comm’n of City of New
York, 397 U.S.
664, 678 (1970) (An “unbroken
practice . . . is not something to be lightly
cast aside”); The Federalist No. 37, p. 229 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961)
(J. Madison).

															IV

															The Moores are obviously aware of those
longstanding congressional practices and Supreme Court precedents,
so they had two choices of how to deal with that stark reality in
this Court. They could have argued that all of those taxes are
unconstitutional and that all of those precedents should be
overruled. Or in an effort to contain the blast radius of their
legal theory, they could have tried to distinguish the MRT from
those other taxes and argue that only the MRT is unconstitutional.
They chose the latter approach.

															To be specific: The Moores explicitly concede
that partnership taxes, S-corporation taxes, and subpart F taxes
are income taxes that are constitutional and need not be
apportioned. Tr. of Oral Arg. 9, 48; Brief for Petitioners 50–51.
The Moores likewise do not ask the Court to overrule any of the
precedents that we have discussed above, which upheld the
attribution of entities’ undistributed income. Id., at
49–52.

															Instead, the Moores seek to differentiate the
MRT from all of those other taxes long imposed by Congress and long
upheld by this Court. The Moores have advanced an array of ad hoc
distinctions to try to explain why those longstanding taxes are
constitutional and why those precedents are correct, and to
simultaneously try to explain why those taxes and precedents do not
eviscerate their argument that the MRT is unconstitutional. But the
Moores’ effort to thread that needle, although inventive, is
unavailing.

															According to the Moores: (1) taxes on
partnerships are distinguishable from the MRT and not controlled by
precedent because partnerships are not separate entities from their
partners; (2) taxes on S corporations are distinguishable from the
MRT and not controlled by precedent because shareholders of S
corporations choose to be taxed directly on corporate income; and
(3) subpart F taxes on American shareholders’ portions of
undistributed foreign corporate income are distinguishable from the
MRT and not controlled by precedent because those taxes apply what
the Moores call “constructive realization.”

															To begin, and perhaps most importantly, the
Moores’ set of ad hoc distinctions does not undermine the clear
rule established by this Court’s precedents: Congress can choose
either to tax the entity on its income or to tax the entity’s
shareholders or partners on their share of the entity’s
undistributed income. Burk-Waggoner Oil Assn. v.
Hopkins, 269 U.S.
110, 114 (1925).

															In any event, the Moores’ attempted distinctions
of the various taxes fail on their own terms.

															First, the Moores contend that partners
can be taxed on a partnership’s income only because, as of the time
that the Sixteenth Amendment was ratified in 1913, partnerships
were not seen as legal entities separate from the partners. But
that assertion is incorrect. When the Sixteenth Amendment was
ratified, the courts, Congress, and state legislatures treated
partnerships as separate entities in many contexts. See,
e.g., Forsyth v. Woods, 11 Wall. 484, 486
(1871) (“The partnership is a distinct thing from the partners
themselves . . . ”); W. Cowles, The Firm as a Legal Person, 57
Central L. J. 343 (1903) (citing many additional
ratification-era cases); see also H. Black, Law of Income Taxation
Under Federal and State Laws 100 (1913) (The “undivided earnings of
a partnership . . . properly constitute income
of the firm but not of the individual partners”); 30Stat. 545,
547–548 (1898) (federal bankruptcy law that treated partnerships as
separate entities); F. Burdick, Law of Partnership, ch. 3, §1, pp.
85–86 (rev. 2d ed. 1906) (It “is becoming more and more customary
for legislation and judicial decisions to treat a partnership as an
entity”).

															During the time period around ratification of
the Sixteenth Amendment, moreover, numerous States imposed taxes
directly on partnerships for partnership income. 1 S. Rowley, The
Modern Law of Partnership §306 (1916); 2 id., §935, at 1295,
and n. 1 (collecting 21 state laws); Black 146. And during
World War I, Congress enacted the Revenue Act of 1917, which also
imposed a tax directly on partnerships. 40Stat. 303. The federal
and state treatment of partnerships as separate legal entities for
tax purposes contravenes the Moores’ theory that pass-through
taxation is inherent in the nature of partnerships rather than a
legislative choice.

															In short, the Moores are incorrect to claim that
partnerships were not historically seen as separate taxable
entities.

															To be sure, courts declined to recognize
partnerships as separate entities in certain common-law contexts. 1
Rowley §118; Burdick, ch. 3, §1. But those cases simply demonstrate
that partnerships were (and are) flexible entities that can receive
flexible legal treatment. Those cases are consistent with the
longstanding principle recognized by this Court that “Congress,
having the authority to tax the net income of partnerships, could
impose the liability upon the partnership directly, as it did under
the Revenue Act of 1917, or upon the ‘individuals carrying on
business in partnership.’ ” Burnet v. Leininger,
285 U.S.
136, 142 (1932) (citation omitted). As with other business
entities, Congress may choose whether to tax (i) the entity or
(ii) its shareholders or partners on the entity’s undistributed
income.

															Second, the Moores seek to distinguish
the taxation of S corporations by saying that shareholders’ choice
to become an S corporation necessarily means that the S
corporation’s income is truly the shareholders’ income. But consent
cannot explain S-corporation taxation; after all, consent to
taxation as an S corporation can be revoked only if shareholders
who hold a majority of the corporation’s shares agree. 26 U. S. C.
§1362(d)(1)(B). So, for example, if shareholders who hold 49
percent of the shares no longer consent to paying taxes on
undistributed earnings, they nonetheless still must do so.
Moreover, there is no reason to think that shareholder consent can
eliminate the apportionment requirement (which is a structural
requirement of the Constitution) and allow Congress to enact an
otherwise unconstitutional tax.

															In short, the Moores’ consent theory does not
explain Congress’s authority to tax the shareholders of S
corporations directly on corporate income. Rather, S corporations
are another example of Congress’s authority to either tax the
corporation itself on corporate income or attribute the
undistributed income to the shareholders and tax the
shareholders.

															Third, the Moores try to distinguish
Congress’s long history of taxing shareholders of closely held
foreign corporations—including through subpart F—on the ground that
those laws apply “the doctrine of constructive realization.” Brief
for Petitioners 47.

															The Moores have not pointed to any use of the
phrase “constructive realization” in this Court’s case law or the
Internal Revenue Code. Instead, the term seems to be a one-off
label woven out of whole cloth by the Moores to allow them to
sidestep any existing tax, especially subpart F, that does not
accord with their proposed constitutional rule. See Brief for
American Tax Policy Institute as Amicus Curiae 28 (noting
that “ ‘constructive realization’ actually is a new, amorphous
phrase of petitioners’ devising”).

															In any event, whatever its label, the Moores’
constructive-realization theory does not distinguish the MRT from
subpart F and other pass-through taxes. For example, the Moores
claim that constructive realization turns on a sufficient degree of
control over the entity. But the level of shareholder control with
the MRT (at least 10 percent) is the same as under the longstanding
subpart F tax. (And control provides an even less persuasive
distinction for partners and for shareholders of S corporations,
who may have even less than a 10 percent share and still have the
entity’s income attributed to them.)

															As part of their effort to distinguish the MRT
from subpart F, the Moores also argue that subpart F is limited to
taxing “ ‘movable income’ ” that may have been shifted
abroad to avoid taxes. Brief for Petitioners 45. But that is not
accurate. Subpart F also includes income from doing business in a
country under certain sanctions. §952(a)(5). Moreover, like subpart
F, the MRT responds to concerns that the owners of
American-controlled foreign corporations keep money offshore to
defer taxation. So it is not clear why the MRT would not also
satisfy the Moores’ requirement of an anti-tax-avoidance
purpose.

															Therefore, even if we were to accept the Moores’
constructive-realization nomenclature and theory, the Moores’
concession that subpart F imposes taxes on so-called constructively
realized income would necessarily mean that the MRT likewise
imposes taxes on constructively realized income. After all, the MRT
is integrated into subpart F’s framework, and it has the same
essential features as subpart F. If subpart F is not
unconstitutional under the “constructive realization” theory—and
the Moores explicitly concede that it is not, Tr. of Oral Arg.
9—then the MRT is likewise not unconstitutional on that theory.

															In short, the Moores cannot meaningfully
distinguish the MRT from similar taxes such as taxes on
partnerships, on S corporations, and on subpart F income.[6] The upshot is that the Moores’
argument, taken to its logical conclusion, could render vast swaths
of the Internal Revenue Code unconstitutional. See, e.g., 26
U. S. C. §305(c) (deemed stock distributions); §§446, 448
(accrual accounting); §701 (partnership taxation); §§951–965
(subpart F); §951A (pass-through tax on global intangible low-taxed
income); §1256(a) (certain futures contracts); §1272(a)
(original-issue discount instruments); §§1361–1379 (S
corporations); §§2501–2524 (gift taxes).

															And those tax provisions, if suddenly
eliminated, would deprive the U. S. Government and the
American people of trillions in lost tax revenue. The logical
implications of the Moores’ theory would therefore require Congress
to either drastically cut critical national programs or
significantly increase taxes on the remaining sources available to
it—including, of course, on ordinary Americans. The Constitution
does not require that fiscal calamity.[7]

															*  *  *

															The MRT attributes the undistributed income of
American-controlled foreign corporations to their American
shareholders, and then taxes the American shareholders on that
income. By doing so, the MRT operates in the same basic way as
Congress’s longstanding taxation of partnerships, S corporations,
and subpart F income. And the MRT is consistent with the principles
that this Court articulated in upholding those kinds of taxes in
cases such as Burk-Waggoner Oil Assn. v. Hopkins,
Heiner v. Mellon, and Helvering v. National
Grocery Co. The MRT therefore falls squarely within Congress’s
constitutional authority to tax.

															For their part, the dissent and the opinion
concurring in the judgment focus primarily on the realization
issue—namely, whether realization is required for an income tax. We
do not decide that question today. When they reach the attribution
question that we do decide, the separate opinions disagree with our
reading of some of the Court’s precedents. We respect their views.
But as we thoroughly explained above, we read the Court’s
precedents differently.

															That said, we emphasize that our holding today
is narrow. It is limited to: (i) taxation of the shareholders
of an entity, (ii) on the undistributed income realized by the
entity, (iii) which has been attributed to the shareholders,
(iv) when the entity itself has not been taxed on that income.
In other words, our holding applies when Congress treats the entity
as a pass-through.[8]

															To be clear, as we indicated earlier, the Due
Process Clause proscribes arbitrary attribution. See supra,
at 14, n. 4. And nothing in this opinion should be read to
authorize any hypothetical congressional effort to tax both an
entity and its shareholders or partners on the same undistributed
income realized by the entity. In such a scenario, the entity would
not simply be a traditional pass-through.[9]

															In addition, as the Government explains, other
kinds of taxes could of course raise different issues. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 58–59, 62, 127–128. In its brief and at oral argument,
for example, the Government indicated that a hypothetical
unapportioned tax on an individual’s holdings or property (for
example, on one’s wealth or net worth) might be considered a tax on
property, not income. See Brief for United States 19
(distinguishing an income tax from a tax on wealth or net worth
because “an income tax targets economic gain ‘between two points of
time’ ”); Tr. of Oral Arg. 69, 127–128.

															And the Government further acknowledges that the
constitutionality of a hypothetical unapportioned tax on
appreciation may depend on, among other things, whether realization
is a constitutional requirement for an income tax. See id.,
at 58–59, 62, 70, 93–95, 106–108, 126–127; see also Brief for
United States 32. The Moores argue that realization is a
constitutional requirement; the Government argues that it is not.
To decide this case, we need not resolve that disagreement over
realization.

															Those are potential issues for another day, and
we do not address or resolve any of those issues here. As to the
Moores’ case, Congress has long taxed shareholders of an entity on
the entity’s undistributed income, and it did the same with the
MRT. This Court has long upheld taxes of that kind, and we do the
same today with the MRT. We affirm the judgment of the U. S.
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The Act also imposed a
similar pass-through tax going forward. §951A. That tax applies to
what is referred to as “global intangible low-taxed income.”
§951A(a). That tax is not at issue in this case.
2
 As discussed below,
infra, at 22–24, our analysis today does not address the
distinct issues that would be raised by (i) an attempt by Congress
to tax both the entity and the shareholders or partners on the
entity’s undistributed income; (ii) taxes on holdings, wealth, or
net worth; or (iii) taxes on appreciation.
3
 The Government argues
that a gain does not need to be realized to constitute income under
the Constitution. The Government contends that Eisner v.
Macomber’s discussion of realization was dicta because the
stock dividend did not represent any kind of economic gain
(realized or unrealized) for the shareholders. The
Government further contends that Eisner v. Macomber’s
discussion of realization has, in any event, been abrogated by
later decisions of this Court, such as Helvering v.
Bruun, 309 U.S.
461 (1940), Helvering v. Griffiths, 318 U.S.
371 (1943), and Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass
Co., 348 U.S.
426 (1955). Because the MRT taxes realized income—namely,
income realized by the corporation and attributed to the
shareholders—we do not address the Government’s argument that a
gain need not be realized to constitute income under the
Constitution. See also infra, at 22–24.
4
 The Government
acknowledges that there are due process limits on attribution to
ensure that the attribution is not arbitrary—for example, limits
based on the taxpayer’s relationship to the underlying income. Tr.
of Oral Arg. 66–67, 96–97; see also Burnet v. Wells,
289 U.S.
670, 678–679 (1933). In this Court, the Moores have not raised
a due process issue regarding the attribution of KisanKraft’s
income to them.
5
 This Court’s 1895
decision in Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co.,
158 U.S.
601, later proscribed unapportioned federal taxation of income
from property, and therefore overruled that holding of
Hubbard. See supra, at 7. But in 1913, the Sixteenth
Amendment then overruled that aspect of
Pollock.
6
 The MRT applies to income
that was realized and accumulated in the past by foreign
corporations, but not taxed by the United States. In the lower
courts, the Moores raised a due process retroactivity argument—that
the MRT taxes income that was earned too far in the past. The Ninth
Circuit rejected that argument based on this Court’s decision in
United States v. Carlton, 512 U.S.
26, 30 (1994). And the Moores did not seek certiorari on that
issue. “We do not normally consider a separate legal question not
raised in the certiorari briefs,” and “see no reason to make an
exception here.” Kasten v. Saint-Gobain Performance
Plastics Corp., 563 U.S.
1, 17 (2011); see also this Court’s Rule 14.1(a).
7
 According to the Moores,
because the Internal Revenue Code’s “definition of ‘gross income’
exerts the full measure of Congress’s taxing power,” a ruling
against them would instantly subject all American stockholders to
taxes on corporate income. Tr. of Oral Arg. 4–5. That claim is
entirely incorrect. Congress has chosen to directly tax some
corporations on their income. See 26 U. S. C. §11.
Congress’s choice to tax the entity rather than the shareholders
controls in that context, just as its contrary choice to tax
certain shareholders or partners, not the entity, on the entity’s
undistributed income controls for the MRT, partnerships, S
corporations, and subpart F.
8
 The opinion concurring in
the judgment reads the Court’s attribution precedents to draw a
line that might call for a “different” conclusion for “a tax on
shareholders of a widely held or domestic corporation.”
Post, at 1 (opinion of Barrett, J.). We do not agree that
the Court’s precedents draw such a line. Nor does our opinion today
draw such a line.
9
 That issue is distinct
from Congress’s well-established practice of taxing the corporation
on corporate income and then taxing shareholders when they receive
a dividend. See Hellmich v. Hellman, 276 U.S.
233, 237–238 (1928); see also United States v.
Hemme, 476 U.S.
558, 572 (1986).


