::decision_cite:: 22-888
::decision_name::  Rudisill v. McDonough
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–888

															_________________

															JAMES R. RUDISILL, PETITIONER v. DENIS
R. McDONOUGH, SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the federal circuit

															[April 16, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Alito joins,
dissenting.

															Our country rewards those who serve in the Armed
Forces with educational benefits. This case involves the
educational benefits available under the Montgomery GI Bill and the
more recent Post-9/11 GI Bill. The Post-9/11 benefits are more
generous than the Montgomery benefits, and veterans are sometimes
entitled to benefits under both programs. By statute, however,
veterans cannot receive benefits under both programs at the same
time. Congress therefore created an election mechanism that allows
veterans to switch from Montgomery benefits to Post-9/11 benefits.
Under that mechanism, when a veteran switches to Post-9/11 benefits
after using some, but not all, of his Montgomery benefits, the
amount of his Post-9/11 benefits is limited to the number of months
he had remaining for Montgomery benefits. 38 U. S. C.
§3327(d). The question here is whether this limitation applies to
James Rudisill, a retired captain in the U. S. Army.

															The Court agrees that Rudisill could not use his
two sets of benefits concurrently, and that he switched to
Post-9/11 benefits when he had some remaining Montgomery benefits.
Ante, at 7, 14. But, it declines to apply the statute’s
corresponding limitation on his benefits because Rudisill was
separately entitled to Montgomery and Post-9/11 benefits due to his
multiple periods of service. Ante, at 2. Because this
approach conflicts with the statute’s plain text, I respectfully
dissent.

															I

															Since World War II, Congress has enacted
numerous statutes that provide veterans with a range of educational
benefits, commonly called GI bills. Two of these statutes are at
issue here: the Veterans’ Educational Assistance Program Act of
1984 (Montgomery GI Bill), 38 U. S. C. §3001 et
seq., and the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act
(Post-9/11 GI Bill), 38 U. S. C. §3301 et seq. As
the majority explains, the Montgomery GI Bill had been the primary
source of educational benefits since 1985, but, in direct response
to the September 11, 2001, attacks and the ensuing conflict,
Congress enacted the Post-9/11 GI Bill and made its benefits
retroactively available. Ante, at 3–4. The Montgomery and
Post-9/11 programs differ in meaningful ways. Montgomery benefits
provide a modest, fixed monthly stipend, whereas Post-9/11 benefits
are more generous and can cover the actual net cost of in-state
tuition, along with other expenses such as tutorial assistance and
licensing test fees. Compare, e.g., §3015 with
§§3313–3315, 3317–3318.

															Both programs impose a durational cap on the
benefits that an individual may receive. Regardless of how long a
veteran has served or how many periods of service he has, a
qualifying veteran is generally eligible for a maximum of 36 months
of benefits under each program. §§3013, 3312. In addition, there is
an aggregate cap on benefits that applies across programs. No
veteran may receive more than 48 months of educational benefits
total. §3695.

															The two educational-benefit programs cover
overlapping time periods. And, several statutory provisions address
this overlap. No veteran can use the two sets of benefits
concurrently. §3322(a). Veterans accordingly must “elect” which
benefits to receive at a specific time. Ibid. As relevant
here, there is a condition attached to one particular election.
Under §3327, if a veteran elects to switch to Post-9/11 benefits
when he “has used, but retains unused,” Montgomery benefits, he is
subject to a statutory “[l]imitation on entitlement.” Under this
limitation, the amount of his Post-9/11 benefits will be limited to
“the number of months of unused entitlement of the individual
under” the Montgomery program. §3327(d)(2)(A).[1]

															The question before us is whether that statutory
limitation applies to Rudisill’s benefits. Rudisill served during
three separate periods, spanning roughly eight years. He first
enlisted in the Army in 2000 and served until 2002. During this
period of service, Rudisill became eligible for Montgomery
benefits. He used some of these benefits to start and, after a
second period of service spanning about a year and a half, complete
an undergraduate degree. Rudisill then rejoined the Army as a
commissioned officer, serving from 2007 to 2011. Rudisill’s second
and third periods of service made him eligible for Post-9/11
benefits. After he completed his third period of military service,
he was admitted to Yale Divinity School.

															Rudisill sought to use his remaining benefits to
fund his graduate education at Yale. At that time, Rudisill had
used 25 months and 14 days of his Montgomery benefits for his
undergraduate education. This left him with 10 months and 16 days
of remaining Montgomery benefits. Rather than use these remaining
benefits, however, Rudisill decided to switch to his Post-9/11
benefits. As part of that switch, Rudisill filled out a Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) form electing to receive Post-9/11
benefits “in lieu of ” Montgomery benefits. App. 1a. He
expressly acknowledged that his “months of entitlement under
chapter 33”—i.e., Post-9/11 benefits—would be “limited to
the number of months of entitlement remaining under chapter
30”—i.e., Montgomery benefits. Ibid.

															Applying the limitation on entitlement in §3327,
the VA awarded Rudisill Post-9/11 benefits for 10 months and 16
days—the amount he had remaining for his Montgomery benefits.
Rudisill appealed, arguing that the §3327 limitation did not apply
to him because he had separate entitlements to Montgomery and
Post-9/11 benefits due to his multiple periods of service. Sitting
en banc, the Federal Circuit held that the VA had correctly applied
the statutory limitation to Rudisill’s benefits. I would
affirm.

															II

															Rudisill’s Post-9/11 benefits are limited to
the amount of Montgomery benefits he had not used. Because he could
not use his sets of benefits concurrently, the statute required
that Rudisill coordinate his entitlements, and that such
coordination would be governed by §3327. Rudisill then used the
election mechanism in §3327 to switch to Post-9/11 benefits after
he had used some, but not all, of his Montgomery benefits. By
making that election, the statute limited his benefits to the
amount of Montgomery benefits he had left. Because the statutory
scheme directs how a veteran in Rudisill’s position can switch to
Post-9/11 benefits, I would apply that mechanism to Rudisill’s
election—and the cost that comes with it.

															As an initial matter, there is no dispute that
Rudisill cannot use his Montgomery and Post-9/11 benefits
concurrently. See Brief for Petitioner 39–40; ante, at 14.
Under §3322(a), a veteran “entitled to” Post-9/11 benefits “who is
also eligible” for Montgomery benefits “may not receive assistance
under two or more such programs concurrently, but shall elect (in
such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe) under which
chapter or provisions to receive educational assistance.” Because
Rudisill is entitled to Montgomery and Post-9/11 benefits, he
cannot receive both benefits at the same time. Instead, he “shall
elect” which benefits to receive.

															How does Rudisill “elect” which benefits to
receive? That is the core of the dispute in this case. In my view,
the statute answers that question by requiring Rudisill to
coordinate his entitlements and creating an election mechanism for
him to do so. After barring the concurrent use of benefits in
§3322(a), Congress included a provision titled “[a]dditional
coordination matters” in subsection (d). This coordination
provision states that “[i]n the case of ” a veteran “entitled”
to benefits under certain other chapters—including the Montgomery
chapter—“coordination of entitlement to educational assistance
under this [Post-9/11] chapter, on the one hand, and such chapters
or provisions, on the other, shall be governed by [ 38
U. S. C. §3327].”

															The “coordination” here refers to a veteran
choosing which “entitlement”—i.e., set of benefits—he
would like to use. The ordinary meaning of “coordination” is “[t]he
action of arranging or placing in the same order, rank, or degree.”
3 Oxford English Dictionary 898 (2d ed. 1989); see also Random
House Dictionary of the English Language 447 (2d ed. 1987)
(defining “coordinate” as “to place or arrange in proper order or
position” and “to assume proper order or relation”); Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 501–502 (1981) (defining
“coordination” as “arrangement in the same order, class, rank, or
dignity” and “coordinate” as “to make coordinate; put in the same
order or rank”). In this context, coordination refers to a veteran
ordering his sets of benefits. A veteran’s entitlement to both
Montgomery and Post-9/11 benefits necessarily requires
“coordination” because he cannot use them concurrently, as
subsection (a) prohibits such use. And, subsection (d) explains
that such coordination “shall be governed” by §3327.[2]Unsurprisingly, the coordination provision
points to an election mechanism. As relevant, under §3327(a)(1), a
veteran “may elect to receive educational assistance under this
[Post-9/11] chapter” if he meets certain criteria. “[A]s of August
1, 2009,” the veteran must be “entitled” to Montgomery benefits and
“mee[t] the requirements for entitlement” to Post-9/11 benefits.
§§3327(a)(1), (2). Next, a veteran may make this election to switch
to Post-9/11 benefits if he “has used, but retains unused,
entitlement under [the Montgomery] chapter.” §3327(a)(1). Put more
simply, this election mechanism applies to a veteran who is
entitled to both Montgomery and Post-9/11 benefits and has used
some, but not all, of his Montgomery benefits.

															There is a consequence, however, for using this
election mechanism. By making a §3327(a)(1) election, a veteran
triggers a “[l]imitation on entitlement.” §3327(d)(2). Under that
limitation, the veteran’s Post-9/11 benefits are limited to “the
number of months of unused entitlement of the individual under [the
Montgomery] chapter . . . as of the date of the
election.” §3327(d)(2)(A). That is, a veteran with remaining
Montgomery benefits who elects to switch to his Post-9/11 benefits
is limited to the amount of Montgomery benefits he has
remaining.

															Rudisill is covered by the election mechanism
and its accompanying limitation. He is entitled to both Montgomery
and Post-9/11 benefits. And, as of August 1, 2009, he had used, but
retained unused, Montgomery benefits. Section 3327(a) therefore
provided him a mechanism by which he could elect to switch to
Post-9/11 benefits. And, Rudisill made that election. App. 1a (“By
electing Chapter 33, I acknowledge that I understand
. . . my months of entitlement under chapter 33 will be
limited to the number of months of entitlement remaining under
chapter 30”). Because Rudisill elected to switch to his Post-9/11
benefits before exhausting his Montgomery benefits, he was subject
to the corresponding limitation on his entitlement: He could
receive Post-9/11 benefits for only the months remaining on his
Montgomery benefits. Indeed, the VA informed him of this
consequence before he made his election, and Rudisill acknowledged
it. See ibid. Applying this limitation, the en banc Federal
Circuit correctly found that Rudisill was limited to 10 months and
16 days of Post-9/11 benefits for his graduate education. That
straightforward conclusion follows from the statutory scheme that
Congress created. I would simply apply that statutory limit to
Rudisill.

															III

															Rudisill and the majority make various
attempts at avoiding the statute’s inevitable conclusion, but none
hits the mark. That is in large part because the statute’s text,
though complicated, is ultimately unambiguous. Accordingly, they do
not dispute that Rudisill earned entitlements to both Montgomery
and Post-9/11 benefits and that he cannot use these entitlements
concurrently. Ante, at 9, 14; Brief for Petitioner 25–26,
39–40. They do not dispute that he made an election to switch to
Post-9/11 benefits. Ante, at 14; Brief for Petitioner 26–27;
App. 1a. And, they do not dispute that, when he made that election,
he had used, but retained unused, Montgomery benefits. Ante,
at 7; Brief for Petitioner 26.

															Instead, Rudisill’s primary argument is that the
specific provisions in the statute governing coordination and
election do not apply to veterans who have multiple periods of
service. But, Rudisill acknowledges that the text of §3327(a) “does
not state that its election mechanism is limited to veterans with
only a single period of service.” Id., at 46. There is
likewise no language in the coordination provision of §3322(d) that
plainly cabins its application based upon periods of service.
Because the plain text contains no carveout based on periods of
service, that should be the end of the debate.

															Rudisill’s contrary argument is especially
unconvincing given that Congress included other period-of-service
limitations in the very subchapter at issue. See Rotkiske v.
Klemm, 589 U.S. 8, 14 (2019) (“Atextual judicial
supplementation is particularly inappropriate when, as here,
Congress has shown that it knows how to adopt the omitted language
or provision”). Congress provided that a “period of service
counted for purposes . . . of an education loan under [a
different program] may not be counted as a period of service
for entitlement to educational assistance under this [Post-9/11]
chapter.” §3322(b) (emphasis added); see also §3322(h) (creating a
“[b]ar to duplication of eligibility based on a single event or
period of service” (emphasis added)). Congress could have
chosen to similarly limit the scope of §3322’s coordination
provision or §3327’s election mechanism based upon periods of
service or separate entitlements, but it did not. We cannot do so
of our own accord.

															Next, Rudisill contends that the election
mechanism in §3327 is merely meant to provide veterans with a
single period of service a way to convert lesser Montgomery
benefits into more generous Post-9/11 benefits on a one-to-one
basis.

															The text of §3327 makes clear, however, that it
is a mechanism for making an election to switch from Montgomery
benefits to Post-9/11 benefits—not merely a way to convert one into
the other. Section 3327 provides how a veteran “may elect to
receive” Post-9/11 benefits instead of his Montgomery benefits.
And, it echoes §3322(a)’s requirement that a veteran entitled to
multiple sets of benefits “shall elect” which benefits to receive
because he cannot use them concurrently. Moreover, the election
mechanism applies only to veterans who are already eligible
for both programs. See §3327(a) (requiring a veteran to be
“entitled to basic educational assistance under [the Montgomery]
chapter” and “mee[t] the requirements for entitlement to
educational assistance under this [Post-9/11] chapter”). Because a
veteran must already qualify for Post-9/11 benefits, this mechanism
cannot provide a way for veterans who lack Post-9/11 benefits to
“convert” their Montgomery benefits. Indeed, the entire point of
the election mechanism is to “coordinat[e]” Montgomery and
Post-9/11 “entitlement[s]”—i.e., to manage two
existing entitlements. §3322(d) (cross-referencing §3327). More
importantly, §3327(a) does not cabin its application based upon
period of service or separate entitlements. See supra, at
7–8. Rudisill’s interpretation ultimately does not overcome the
application of §3327’s plain text to his circumstance—he is
entitled to both sets of benefits and switched to Post-9/11
benefits when he “ha[d] used, but retain[ed] unused,” Montgomery
benefits.

															The majority, for its part, takes a different
tack. Its reasoning seems to rest on the theory that because
Rudisill was “entitled” to Montgomery benefits and “entitled” to
Post-9/11 benefits, those multiple entitlements cannot be limited
when switching between benefits. Ante, at 9–10. But, the
majority’s own reasoning undermines that theory. It agrees that
Rudisill cannot receive the full 72 months of benefits he earned
because a separate statutory provision limits him to 48 months
total. See ante, at 10; §3695. And, it agrees that Rudisill
cannot use his two separate entitlements concurrently. Ante,
at 5; §3322(a). This is true even though Rudisill is “entitled” to
36 months of Montgomery benefits and “entitled” to 36 months of
Post-9/11 benefits. See §§3011(a), 3311(a). In other words, the
majority itself admits that Rudisill’s entitlements are not
absolute. But, while the majority accepts certain statutory
limitations on Rudisill’s multiple “entitlements,” it rejects
others—even ones listed in the same subsection. Indeed, even though
the Court agrees that some election must be made, it rejects
the election process spelled out in the statute to address
Rudisill’s circumstance. My focus on this election does not
“blu[r ] all elections into one,” ante, at 15, but
rather, applies specific statutory text that plainly covers
Rudisill.

															The majority tries to justify its selective
reading of the statute by suggesting that the coordination
provision in §3322(d) “simply does not speak to a veteran who just
wants to use one of his two separate entitlements.” Ante, at
12. But that provision specifically governs the “coordination of
entitlement” to Post-9/11 benefits “on the one hand” and
Montgomery benefits “on the other.” §3322(d) (emphasis added). It
is unclear how a statute could more explicitly cover the
interaction between two separate entitlements. The majority also
provides no satisfactory answer for why the concurrent-use bar in
§3322(a) applies to Rudisill, but the coordination provision in
§3322(d) does not. Both provisions cover veterans who qualify for
both sets of benefits, yet the majority applies one but not the
other to Rudisill. More fundamentally, the Court agrees that
some election must be made. See ante, at 14. Rather
than leave Rudisill to make some uncodified election to switch to
Post-9/11 benefits, I would apply the election mechanism that
Congress created to cover his circumstance.

															The majority’s remaining arguments are simply
critiques of Congress’s policy judgments. The Court calls the
Government’s reading of the statute’s election mechanism
“nonsensical” because it requires a veteran to exhaust or forfeit
his Montgomery benefits before switching to Post-9/11 benefits.
Ante, at 17. But, in reality, the election mechanism offers
a veteran in Rudisill’s circumstance two paths. He may use 48
months of benefits by first using all 36 months of his Montgomery
benefits, followed by 12 months of Post-9/11 benefits.[3] Or, he could use 36 months of
benefits, with his choice of when to switch from Montgomery to
Post-9/11 benefits. It is not “remarkable” for Congress to “include
a rule allowing individuals to make a wholly voluntary election to
receive a more generous benefit earlier, at a cost.” BO v.
Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 321, 352 (Ct. App. Vet. Cl. 2019)
(Bartley, J., dissenting).

															In any event, the wisdom of this limitation is
not up to this Court. It was for Congress to decide what Post-9/11
benefits a veteran should receive retroactively. As Rudisill
acknowledges, the Post-9/11 program is “far more generous” and,
accordingly, costs much more than the Montgomery program. Brief for
Petitioner 15. Perhaps the limitation on entitlement reflects a
measure to manage this growing cost, given that “[p]assing a law
often requires compromise.” NLRB v. SW General, Inc.,
580 U.S. 288, 306 (2017). Or, perhaps not. Either way, the
limitation is what Congress enacted—whether the majority agrees
with its fairness or not—and the text that Congress enacted must
dictate the result in this case.

															Moving even further away from the text, the
majority hints that the veteran’s canon could apply if the statute
were ambiguous. Ante, at 18. The veteran’s canon directs
that “interpretive doubt is to be resolved in the veteran’s favor.”
Brown v. Gardner, 513 U.S.
115, 118 (1994). Yet, as the majority recognizes, this canon
cannot apply when the statutory text is plain, so it has no role to
play here. More importantly, substantive canons such as the
veteran’s canon rest on uncertain foundations. See Arizona
v. Navajo Nation, 599 U.S. 555, 572 (2023) (Thomas, J.,
concurring). I share Justice Kavanaugh’s concern that the veteran’s
canon “appears to have developed almost by accident,” and no
explanation has been provided for its foundation. Ante, at 2
(concurring opinion). I question whether this purported canon
should ever have a role in our interpretation.

															IV

															The Court holds that, although Rudisill must
make some election to switch from his Montgomery to Post-9/11
benefits, the statute’s corresponding limits do not apply because
it would reduce the amount of available benefits. In my view, the
Court ignores the statutory mechanism that Congress created in
favor of an interpretation that reaches a desired outcome. I
respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
 There is another part of
the limitation’s formula that is of no concern in this case. Title
38 U. S. C. §3327(d)(2)(B) encompasses “the number of
months, if any, of entitlement revoked by the individual under
subsection (c)(1).” This provision concerns a veteran’s transfer of
benefits to family members, which Rudisill has not
done.
2
 Contrary to the Court’s
assertion, coordination and election are distinct acts. See
ante, at 12. Coordination requires a veteran to choose which
entitlement to use at any given time; an election is the mechanism
by which he switches from one set of benefits to
another.
3
 This option arises
because once a veteran has used all his Montgomery benefits, he is
no longer entitled to multiple sets of benefits, rendering the
coordination provision and election mechanism inapplicable. Both of
those provisions apply only to a veteran entitled to more than one
set of benefits. See §§3322(d), 3327(a).


