::decision_cite:: 22-915
::decision_name::  United States v. Rahimi
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–915

															_________________

															UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ZACKEY RAHIMI

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the fifth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															Justice Barrett, concurring.

															Despite its unqualified text, the Second Amendment is not
absolute. It codified a pre-existing right, and pre-existing limits
on that right are part and parcel of it. District of
Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S.
570, 595, 627 (2008). Those limits define the scope of “the
right to bear arms” as it was originally understood; to identify
them, courts must examine our “historical tradition of firearm
regulation.” New York State Rifle Pistol Assn., Inc. v.
Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 17, 19 (2022). That evidence marks where
the right stops and the State’s authority to regulate begins. A
regulation is constitutional only if the government affirmatively
proves that it is “consistent with the Second Amendment’s text and
historical understanding.” Id., at 26.

															Because the Court has taken an originalist approach to the
Second Amendment, it is worth pausing to identify the basic
premises of originalism. The theory is built on two core
principles: that the meaning of constitutional text is fixed at the
time of its ratification and that the “discoverable historical
meaning . . . has legal significance and is authoritative
in most circumstances.” K. Whittington, Originalism: A Critical
Introduction, 82 Ford. L. Rev. 375, 378 (2013) (Whittington).
Ratification is a democratic act that renders constitutional text
part of our fundamental law, see Arts. V, VII, and that text
“remains law until lawfully altered,” S. Sachs, Originalism:
Standard and Procedure, 135 Harv. L. Rev. 777, 782 (2022). So
for an originalist, the history that matters most is the history
surrounding the ratification of the text; that backdrop illuminates
the meaning of the enacted law. History (or tradition) that long
postdates ratification does not serve that function. To be sure,
postenactment history can be an important tool. For example, it can
“reinforce our understanding of the Constitution’s original
meaning”; “liquidate ambiguous constitutional provisions”; provide
persuasive evidence of the original meaning; and, if stare
decisis applies, control the outcome. See Vidal v.
Elster, 602 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2024) (Barrett, J.,
concurring in part) (slip op., at 13–14). But generally speaking,
the use of postenactment history requires some justification other
than originalism simpliciter.

															In Bruen, the Court took history beyond the founding era,
considering gun regulations that spanned the 19th century. 597
U. S., at 50–70. I expressed reservations about the scope of
that inquiry but concluded that the timing question did not matter
to Bruen’s holding. Id., at 81–83 (concurring
opinion). It bears emphasis, however, that my questions were about
the time period relevant to discerning the Second Amendment’s
original meaning—for instance, what is the post-1791 cutoff for
discerning how the Second Amendment was originally understood?
Id., at 82 (“How long after ratification may subsequent
practice illuminate original public meaning?”). My doubts were
not about whether “tradition,” standing alone, is
dispositive. Id., at 83 (“[T]oday’s decision should not be
understood to endorse freewheeling reliance on historical practice
from the mid-to-late 19th century to establish the original meaning
of the Bill of Rights”). As I have explained elsewhere, evidence of
“tradition” unmoored from original meaning is not binding law.
Vidal, 602 U. S., at ___–___ (Barrett, J., concurring
in part) (slip op., at 13–15). And scattered cases or regulations
pulled from history may have little bearing on the meaning of the
text. Samia v. United States, 599 U.S. 635, 656–657
(2023) (Barrett, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment).

															“Original history”—i.e., the generally dispositive
kind—plays two roles in the Second Amendment context. It elucidates
how contemporaries understood the text—for example, the meaning of
the phrase “bear Arms.” See Heller, 554 U. S., at
582–592. It also plays the more complicated role of determining the
scope of the pre-existing right that the people enshrined in our
fundamental law.[1]* In
Rahimi’s case, the Court uses history in this latter way. Call this
“original contours” history: It looks at historical gun regulations
to identify the contours of the right.

															Courts have struggled with this use of history in the wake of
Bruen. One difficulty is a level of generality problem: Must
the government produce a founding-era relative of the challenged
regulation—if not a twin, a cousin? Or do founding-era gun
regulations yield concrete principles that mark the borders of the
right?

															Many courts, including the Fifth Circuit, have understood
Bruen to require the former, narrower approach. But
Bruen emphasized that “analogical reasoning” is not a
“regulatory straightjacket.” 597 U. S., at 30. To be
consistent with historical limits, a challenged regulation
need not be an updated model of a historical counterpart. Besides,
imposing a test that demands overly specific analogues has serious
problems. To name two: It forces 21st-century regulations to follow
late-18th-century policy choices, giving us “a law trapped in
amber.” Ante, at 7. And it assumes that founding-era
legislatures maximally exercised their power to regulate, thereby
adopting a “use it or lose it” view of legislative authority. Such
assumptions are flawed, and originalism does not require them.

															“Analogical reasoning” under Bruen demands a wider lens:
Historical regulations reveal a principle, not a mold. See,
e.g., 597 U. S., at 28–29 (explaining that the
Amendment does not apply only to the catalogue of arms that existed
in the 18th century, but rather to all weapons satisfying the
“general definition” of “bearable arms” (emphasis added));
id., at 30–31 (discussing the “ ‘sensitive
places’ ” principle that limits the right to public carry);
cf. Vidal, 602 U. S., at ___–___ (Barrett, J.,
concurring in part) (slip op., at 7–9); Whittington 386 (“The
insight to be gleaned is not the authoritative status of the
expected application, but the apparent rule at play given that such
an application is expected to follow from it”). To be sure, a court
must be careful not to read a principle at such a high level of
generality that it waters down the right. Pulling principle from
precedent, whether case law or history, is a standard feature of
legal reasoning, and reasonable minds sometimes disagree about how
broad or narrow the controlling principle should be.

															Here, though, the Court settles on just the right level of
generality: “Since the founding, our Nation’s firearm laws have
included provisions preventing individuals who threaten physical
harm to others from misusing firearms.” Ante, at 5; see also
Kanter v. Barr, 919 F.3d 437, 451, 464–465 (CA7 2019)
(Barrett, J., dissenting) (“History is consistent with common
sense: it demonstrates that legislatures have the power to prohibit
dangerous people from possessing guns”). Section 922(g)(8)(C)(i)
fits well within that principle; therefore, Rahimi’s facial
challenge fails. Harder level-of-generality problems can await
another day.

Notes
1
*To my mind, this use of
history walks a fine line between original meaning (which controls)
and expectations about how the text would apply (which do not). See
Whittington 383 (“Specific expectations about the consequences of a
legal rule are distinct from the meaning of the rule
itself ”). Contemporary government actors might have been
“wrong about the consequences of their own constitutional rule,” or
they “might not have fully and faithfully implemented the adopted
constitutional rule themselves.” Id., at 384. Thus, while
early applications of a constitutional rule can help illuminate its
original scope, an interpreter must exercise care in considering
them. Id., at 385–386. In the Second Amendment context,
particular gun regulations—even if from the ratification era—do not
themselves have the status of constitutional law.


