::decision_cite:: 22-915
::decision_name::  United States v. Rahimi
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–915

															_________________

															UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ZACKEY
RAHIMI

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan
joins, concurring.

															Today, the Court applies its decision in New
York State Rifle & Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen, 597
U.S. 1 (2022), for the first time. Although I continue to believe
that Bruen was wrongly decided, see id., at 83–133
(Breyer, J., joined by Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ., dissenting), I
join the Court’s opinion applying that precedent to uphold 18
U. S. C. §922(g)(8).

															The Court today emphasizes that a challenged
regulation “must comport with the principles underlying the Second
Amendment,” but need not have a precise historical match.
Ante, at 7–8. I agree. I write separately to highlight why
the Court’s interpretation of Bruen, and not the dissent’s,
is the right one. In short, the Court’s interpretation permits a
historical inquiry calibrated to reveal something useful and
transferable to the present day, while the dissent would make the
historical inquiry so exacting as to be useless, a too-sensitive
alarm that sounds whenever a regulation did not exist in an
essentially identical form at the founding.

															I

															Even under Bruen, this is an easy case.
Section 922(g)(8) prohibits an individual subject to a domestic
violence restraining order from possessing a firearm, so long as
certain criteria are met. See ante, at 3–4. Section
922(g)(8) is wholly consistent with the Nation’s history and
tradition of firearm regulation.

															The Court correctly concludes that “the Second
Amendment permits the disarmament of individuals who pose a
credible threat to the physical safety of others.” Ante, at
8. That conclusion finds historical support in both the surety
laws, which “provided a mechanism for preventing violence before it
occurred” by requiring an individual who posed a credible threat of
violence to another to post a surety, and the “going armed” laws,
which “provided a mechanism for punishing those who had menaced
others with firearms” through forfeiture of the arms or
imprisonment. Ante, at 12. “Taken together, the surety and
going armed laws confirm what common sense suggests: When an
individual poses a clear threat of physical violence to another,
the threatening individual may be disarmed.” Ante, at 13.
Section 922(g)(8)’s prohibition on gun possession for individuals
subject to domestic violence restraining orders is part of that
“tradition of firearm regulation allow[ing] the Government to
disarm individuals who present a credible threat to the physical
safety of others,” ante, at 16, as are the similar
restrictions that have been adopted by 48 States and Territories,
see Brief for United States 34–35, and nn. 22–23 (collecting
statutes).

															The Court’s opinion also clarifies an important
methodological point that bears repeating: Rather than asking
whether a present-day gun regulation has a precise historical
analogue, courts applying Bruen should “conside[r] whether
the challenged regulation is consistent with the principles
that underpin our regulatory tradition.” Ante, at 7
(emphasis added); see also ante, at 7–8 (“The law must
comport with the principles underlying the Second Amendment, but it
need not be a ‘dead ringer’ or a ‘historical twin’ ” (quoting
Bruen, 597 U. S., at 30)). Here, for example, the
Government has not identified a founding-era or Reconstruction-era
law that specifically disarmed domestic abusers, see,
e.g., Tr. of Oral Arg. 40 (conceding as much), but it
did not need to do so. Although §922(g)(8) “is by no means
identical” to the surety or going armed laws, ante, at 13,
it “restricts gun use to mitigate demonstrated threats of physical
violence, just as the surety and going armed laws d[id],”
ante, at 14. That shared principle is sufficient.

															II

															The dissent reaches a different conclusion by
applying the strictest possible interpretation of Bruen. It
picks off the Government’s historical sources one by one, viewing
any basis for distinction as fatal. See, e.g.,
post, at 18 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (“Although surety laws
shared a common justification with §922(g)(8), surety laws imposed
a materially different burden”); post, at 25–26 (explaining
that “[a]ffray laws are wide of the mark” because they “expressly
carve out the very conduct §922(g)(8) was designed to prevent
(interpersonal violence in the home)”). The dissent urges a close
look “at the historical law’s justification as articulated during
the relevant time period,” post, at 28, and a “careful
parsing of regulatory burdens” to ensure that courts do not “stray
too far from [history] by eliding material differences between
historical and modern laws,” post, at 15. The dissent
criticizes this Court for adopting a more “piecemeal approach” that
distills principles from a variety of historical evidence rather
than insisting on a precise historical analogue. Post, at
21.

															If the dissent’s interpretation of Bruen
were the law, then Bruen really would be the “one-way
ratchet” that I and the other dissenters in that case feared,
“disqualify[ing] virtually any ‘representative historical analogue’
and mak[ing] it nearly impossible to sustain common-sense
regulations necessary to our Nation’s safety and security.” 597
U. S., at 112 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Thankfully, the Court
rejects that rigid approach to the historical inquiry. As the Court
puts it today, Bruen was “not meant to suggest a law trapped
in amber.” Ante, at 7.

															This case lays bare the perils of the dissent’s
approach. Because the dissent concludes that “§922(g)(8) addresses
a societal problem—the risk of interpersonal violence—‘that has
persisted since the 18th century,’ ” it insists that the means
of addressing that problem cannot be “ ‘materially
different’ ” from the means that existed in the 18th century.
Post, at 7. That is so, it seems, even when the weapons in
question have evolved dramatically. See R. Roth, Why Guns Are and
Are Not the Problem, in A Right To Bear Arms?: The Contested Role
of History in Contemporary Debates on the Second Amendment 117 (J.
Tucker, B. Hacker, & M. Vining eds. 2019) (explaining that guns
in the 18th century took a long time to load, typically fired only
one shot, and often misfired). According to the dissent, the
solution cannot be “materially different” even when societal
perception of the problem has changed, and even if it is now clear
to everyone that the historical means of addressing the problem had
been wholly inadequate. Given the fact that the law at the founding
was more likely to protect husbands who abused their spouses than
offer some measure of accountability, see, e.g., R.
Siegel, “The Rule of Love”: Wife Beating as Prerogative and
Privacy, 105 Yale L. J. 2117, 2154–2170 (1996), it is no
surprise that that generation did not have an equivalent to
§922(g)(8). Under the dissent’s approach, the legislatures of today
would be limited not by a distant generation’s determination that
such a law was unconstitutional, but by a distant generation’s
failure to consider that such a law might be necessary. History has
a role to play in Second Amendment analysis, but a rigid adherence
to history, (particularly history predating the inclusion of women
and people of color as full members of the polity), impoverishes
constitutional interpretation and hamstrings our democracy.

															III

															The Court today clarifies Bruen’s
historical inquiry and rejects the dissent’s exacting historical
test. I welcome that development. That being said, I remain
troubled by Bruen’s myopic focus on history and tradition,
which fails to give full consideration to the real and present
stakes of the problems facing our society today. In my view, the
Second Amendment allows legislators “to take account of the serious
problems posed by gun violence,” Bruen, 597 U. S., at
91 (Breyer, J., dissenting), not merely by asking what their
predecessors at the time of the founding or Reconstruction thought,
but by listening to their constituents and crafting new and
appropriately tailored solutions. Under the means-end scrutiny that
this Court rejected in Bruen but “regularly use[s]
. . . in cases involving other constitutional
provisions,” id., at 106, the constitutionality of
§922(g)(8) is even more readily apparent.[1]*

															To start, the Government has a compelling
interest in keeping firearms out of the hands of domestic abusers.
A woman who lives in a house with a domestic abuser is five times
more likely to be murdered if the abuser has access to a gun. See
A. Kivisto & M. Porter, Firearm Use Increases Risk of Multiple
Victims in Domestic Homicides, 48 J. Am. Acad. Psychiatry & L.
26 (2020). With over 70 people shot and killed by an intimate
partner each month in the United States, the seriousness of the
problem can hardly be overstated. See Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, WISQARS Nat. Violent Death Reporting System,
Violent Deaths Report 2020, https://wisqars.cdc.gov/nvdrs (showing
that 863 people were killed with a firearm by a spouse or other
intimate partner in 2020). Because domestic violence is rarely
confined to the intimate partner that receives the protective
order, the Government’s interest extends even further. In roughly a
quarter of cases where an abuser killed an intimate partner, the
abuser also killed someone else, such as a child, family member, or
roommate. See S. Smith, K. Fowler, & P. Niolon, Intimate
Partner Homicide and Corollary Victims in 16 States: National
Violent Death Reporting System, 2003–2009, 104 Am. J. Pub. Health
461, 463–464 (2014). Moreover, one study found that domestic
disputes were the most dangerous type of call for responding
officers, causing more officer deaths with a firearm than any other
type of call. See N. Breul & M. Keith, Deadly Calls and Fatal
Encounters: Analysis of U. S. Law Enforcement Line of Duty
Deaths When Officers Responded to Dispatched Calls for Service and
Conducted Enforcement, 2010–2014, p. 15 (2016).

															While the Second Amendment does not yield
automatically to the Government’s compelling interest, §922(g)(8)
is tailored to the vital objective of keeping guns out of the hands
of domestic abusers. See ante, at 3–4, 14. Section 922(g)(8)
should easily pass constitutional muster under any level of
scrutiny.

															Although I continue to think that the means-end
approach to Second Amendment analysis is the right one, neither
party asks the Court to reconsider Bruen at this time, and
that question would of course involve other considerations than
whether Bruen was rightly decided. Whether considered under
Bruen or under means-end scrutiny, §922(g)(8) clears the
constitutional bar. I join in full the Court’s opinion, which
offers a more helpful model than the dissent for lower courts
struggling to apply Bruen.

Notes
1
*By “means-end scrutiny,” I
refer to the mode of analysis that would permit courts “to consider
the State’s interest in preventing gun violence, the effectiveness
of the contested law in achieving that interest, the degree to
which the law burdens the Second Amendment right, and, if
appropriate, any less restrictive alternatives.” Bruen, 597
U. S., at 131 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Prior to Bruen,
the Courts of Appeals would apply a level of means-end scrutiny
“ ‘proportionate to the severity of the burden that the law
imposes on the right’: strict scrutiny if the burden is severe, and
intermediate scrutiny if it is not.” Id., at
103.


