::decision_cite:: 22-915
::decision_name::  United States v. Rahimi
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–915

															_________________

															UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ZACKEY RAHIMI

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the fifth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															Justice Gorsuch, concurring.

															Mr. Rahimi pursues the “most difficult challenge to mount
successfully”: a facial challenge. United States v.
Salerno, 481 U.S.
739, 745 (1987). He contends that 18 U. S. C.
§922(g)(8) violates the Second Amendment “in all its applications.”
Bucklew v. Precythe, 587 U.S. 119, 138 (2019). To
prevail, he must show “no set of circumstances” exists in which
that law can be applied without violating the Second Amendment.
Salerno, 481 U. S., at 745. I agree with the Court that
he has failed to make that showing. Ante, at 8.

															That is not because the Constitution has little to say about the
matter. The Second Amendment protects the “right of the people to
keep and bear Arms.” “ ‘[T]ext and history’ ” dictate the
contours of that right. Ante, at 6 (quoting New York
State Rifle Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 22
(2022)). As this Court has recognized, too, the Amendment’s text
“ ‘guarantee[s] the individual right to possess and carry
weapons in case of confrontation.’ ” Id., at 32
(quoting District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S.
570, 592 (2008)). And where that “text covers an individual’s
conduct,” a law regulating that conduct may be upheld only if it is
“consistent with this Nation’s historical tradition of firearms
regulation.” 597 U. S., at 17; see ante, at 6.

															In this case, no one questions that the law Mr. Rahimi
challenges addresses individual conduct covered by the text of the
Second Amendment. So, in this facial challenge, the question
becomes whether that law, in at least some of its applications, is
consistent with historic firearm regulations. To prevail, the
government need not show that the current law is a “ ‘dead
ringer’ ” for some historical analogue. Ante, at 8
(quoting Bruen, 597 U. S., at 30). But the government
must establish that, in at least some of its applications, the
challenged law “impose[s] a comparable burden on the right of armed
self-defense” to that imposed by a historically recognized
regulation. Id., at 29; see ante, at 7. And it must
show that the burden imposed by the current law “is comparably
justified.” Bruen, 597 U. S., at 29; see ante,
at 7.

															Why do we require those showings? Through them, we seek to honor
the fact that the Second Amendment “codified a pre-existing
right” belonging to the American people, one that carries the same
“scope” today that it was “understood to have when the people
adopted” it. Heller, 554 U. S., at 592, 634–635. When
the people ratified the Second Amendment, they surely understood an
arms-bearing citizenry posed some risks. But just as surely they
believed that the right protected by the Second Amendment was
itself vital to the preservation of life and liberty. See,
e.g., 1 Blackstone’s Commentaries, Editor’s App. 300
(St. George Tucker ed. 1803) (observing that the Second Amendment
may represent the “palladium of liberty,” for “[t]he right of self
defence is the first law of nature,” and “in most governments[,] it
has been the study of rulers to confine this right within the
narrowest limits”); 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of
the United States §1890, p. 746 (1833) (“The right of the citizens
to keep and bear arms has justly been considered, as the palladium
of the liberties of a republic”).

															We have no authority to question that judgment. As judges
charged with respecting the people’s directions in the
Constitution—directions that are “trapped in amber,” see
ante, at 7—our only lawful role is to apply them in the
cases that come before us. Developments in the world may change,
facts on the ground may evolve, and new laws may invite new
challenges, but the Constitution the people adopted remains our
enduring guide. Bruen, 597 U. S., at 27–28; see,
e.g., United States v. Jones, 565 U.S.
400, 404–405 (2012); Caetano v. Massachusetts,
577 U.S.
411, 411–412 (2016) (per curiam). If changes are to
be made to the Constitution’s directions, they must be made by the
American people. Nor is there anything remotely unusual about any
of this. Routinely, litigants and courts alike must consult history
when seeking to discern the meaning and scope of a constitutional
provision. See post, at 6–16 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring)
(offering examples). And when doing so, litigants and courts “must
exercise care.” See post, at 3, n. (Barrett, J.,
concurring).

															Consider just one example. We have recognized that the Sixth
Amendment enshrines another pre-existing right: the right of a
defendant to confront his accusers at trial. Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U.S.
36, 54 (2004). Just as here, we have recognized that, in
placing this right in the Constitution, the people set its scope,
“admitting only those exceptions established at the time of the
founding.” Ibid. And, just as here, when a party asks us to
sustain some modern exception to the confrontation right, we
require them to point to a close historic analogue to justify it.
See Giles v. California, 554
U.S. 353, 358–361 (2008). Just as here, too, we have expressly
rejected arguments that courts should proceed differently, such as
by trying to glean from historic exceptions overarching “policies,”
“ ‘purposes,’ ” or “values” to guide them in future
cases. See id., at 374–375 (opinion of Scalia, J.). We have
rejected those paths because the Constitution enshrines the
people’s choice to achieve certain policies, purposes, and values
“through very specific means”: the right of confrontation as
originally understood at the time of the founding. Id., at
375. As we have put it, a court may not “extrapolate” from the
Constitution’s text and history “the values behind [that right],
and then . . . enforce its guarantees only to the extent
they serve (in the courts’ views) those underlying values.”
Ibid. Proceeding that way, we have warned, risks handing
judges a license to turn “the guarantee of confrontation” into “no
guarantee at all.” Ibid. As there, so too here: Courts must
proceed with care in making comparisons to historic firearms
regulations, or else they risk gaming away an individual right the
people expressly preserved for themselves in the Constitution’s
text.

															Proceeding with this well in mind today, the Court rightly holds
that Mr. Rahimi’s facial challenge to §922(g)(8) cannot succeed. It
cannot because, through surety laws and restrictions on “going
armed,” the people in this country have understood from the start
that the government may disarm an individual temporarily after a
“judicial determinatio[n]” that he “likely would threaten or ha[s]
threatened another with a weapon.” Ante, at 14. And, at
least in some cases, the statute before us works in the same way
and does so for the same reasons: It permits a court to disarm a
person only if, after notice and hearing, it finds that he
“represents a credible threat to the physical safety” of others.
§§922(g)(8)(A), (g)(8)(C)(i). A court, too, may disarm an
individual only for so long as its order is in effect. §922(g)(8).
In short, in at least some applications, the challenged law does
not diminish any aspect of the right the Second Amendment was
originally understood to protect. See Bruen, 597 U. S.,
at 24.

															I appreciate that one of our colleagues sees things differently.
Post, at 6–7 (Thomas, J., dissenting). But if reasonable
minds can disagree whether §922(g)(8) is analogous to past
practices originally understood to fall outside the Second
Amendment’s scope, we at least agree that is the only proper
question a court may ask. Post, at 5. Discerning what the
original meaning of the Constitution requires in this or that case
may sometimes be difficult. Asking that question, however, at least
keeps judges in their proper lane, seeking to honor the supreme law
the people have ordained rather than substituting our will for
theirs. And whatever indeterminacy may be associated with seeking
to honor the Constitution’s original meaning in modern disputes,
that path offers surer footing than any other this Court has
attempted from time to time. Come to this Court with arguments from
text and history, and we are bound to reason through them as best
we can. (As we have today.) Allow judges to reign unbounded by
those materials, or permit them to extrapolate their own broad new
principles from those sources, and no one can have any idea how
they might rule. (Except the judges themselves.) Faithful adherence
to the Constitution’s original meaning may be an imperfect guide,
but I can think of no more perfect one for us to follow.

															Just consider how lower courts approached the Second Amendment
before our decision in Bruen. They reviewed firearm
regulations under a two-step test that quickly “devolved” into an
interest-balancing inquiry, where courts would weigh a law’s burden
on the right against the benefits the law offered. See
Rogers v. Grewal, 590 U. S. ___, ___, and n. 1
(2020) (Thomas, J., joined by Kavanaugh, J., dissenting from denial
of certiorari) (slip op., at 5, and n. 1); see also,
e.g., Peruta v. County of San Diego,
742 F.3d 1144, 1167–1168, 1176–1177 (CA9 2014); Drake v.
Filko, 724 F.3d 426, 457 (CA3 2013) (Hardiman, J.,
dissenting). Some judges expressed concern that the prevailing
two-step test had become “just window dressing for judicial
policymaking.” Duncan v. Bonta, 19 F. 4th 1087, 1148
(CA9 2021) (en banc) (Bumatay, J., dissenting). To them, the
inquiry worked as a “black box regime” that gave a judge broad
license to support policies he “[f]avored” and discard those he
disliked. Ibid. How did the government fare under that
regime? In one circuit, it had an “undefeated, 50–0 record.”
Id., at 1167, n. 8 (VanDyke, J., dissenting). In
Bruen, we rejected that approach for one guided by
constitutional text and history. 597 U. S., at 19. Perhaps
judges’ jobs would be easier if they could simply strike the policy
balance they prefer. And a principle that the government always
wins surely would be simple for judges to implement. But either
approach would let judges stray far from the Constitution’s
promise. See Heller, 554 U. S., at 634.

															One more point: Our resolution of Mr. Rahimi’s facial challenge
to §922(g)(8) necessarily leaves open the question whether the
statute might be unconstitutional as applied in “particular
circumstances.” Salerno, 481 U. S., at 751. So, for
example, we do not decide today whether the government may disarm a
person without a judicial finding that he poses a “credible threat”
to another’s physical safety. §922(g)(8)(C)(i); see ante, at
8. We do not resolve whether the government may disarm an
individual permanently. See ante, at 14 (stressing that,
“like surety bonds of limited duration, Section 922(g)(8)’s
restriction was temporary as applied to [Mr.] Rahimi”). We do not
determine whether §922(g)(8) may be constitutionally enforced
against a person who uses a firearm in self-defense. Notably, the
surety laws that inform today’s decision allowed even an individual
found to pose a threat to another to “obtain an exception if he
needed his arms for self-defense.” Ante, at 12; see also
post, at 23 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Nor do we purport to
approve in advance other laws denying firearms on a categorical
basis to any group of persons a legislature happens to deem, as the
government puts it, “not ‘responsible.’ ” Ante, at 17
(quoting Brief for United States 6); see Tr. of Oral Arg. 31–32;
see also post, at 27 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (“Not a single
Member of the Court adopts the Government’s theory”).

															We do not resolve any of those questions (and perhaps others
like them) because we cannot. Article III of the Constitution vests
in this Court the power to decide only the “ ‘actual
cas[e]’ ” before us, “ ‘not abstractions.’ ”
Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S.
75, 89 (1947). And the case before us does not pose the
question whether the challenged statute is always lawfully applied,
or whether other statutes might be permissible, but only whether
this one has any lawful scope. Nor should future litigants
and courts read any more into our decision than that. As this Court
has long recognized, what we say in our opinions must “be taken in
connection with the case in which those expressions are used,”
Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 399 (1821), and may
not be “stretch[ed] . . . beyond their context,”
Brown v. Davenport, 596 U.S. 118, 141 (2022).

															Among all the opinions issued in this case, its central messages
should not be lost. The Court reinforces the focus on text,
history, and tradition, following exactly the path we described in
Bruen. Ante, at 5–8. And after carefully consulting
those materials, the Court “conclude[s] only this”: “An
individual found by a court to pose a credible threat to the
physical safety of another may be temporarily disarmed consistent
with the Second Amendment.” Ante, at 17 (emphasis added).
With these observations, I am pleased to concur.

													
