::decision_cite:: 22-915
::decision_name::  United States v. Rahimi
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–915

															_________________

															UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ZACKEY RAHIMI

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the fifth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															Justice Jackson, concurring.

															This case tests our Second Amendment jurisprudence as shaped in
particular by New York State Rifle Pistol Assn., Inc. v.
Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (2022). I disagree with the methodology of
that decision; I would have joined the dissent had I been a Member
of the Court at that time. See generally id., at 83–133
(Breyer, J., dissenting). But Bruen is now binding law.
Today’s decision fairly applies that precedent, so I join the
opinion in full.

															I write separately because we now have two years’ worth of
post-Bruen cases under our belts, and the experiences of
courts applying its history-and-tradition test should bear on our
assessment of the workability of that legal standard. This case
highlights the apparent difficulty faced by judges on the ground.
Make no mistake: Today’s effort to clear up “misunderst[andings],”
ante, at 7, is a tacit admission that lower courts are
struggling. In my view, the blame may lie with us, not with
them.

															I

															The Court today expounds on the history-and-tradition inquiry
that Bruen requires. Ante, at 7–8. We emphasize that
the Second Amendment is “not . . . a law trapped in
amber.” Ante, at 7. It “permits more than just those
regulations identical to ones that could be found in 1791”; indeed,
“a challenged regulation [that] does not precisely match its
historical precursors . . . ‘still may be analogous
enough to pass constitutional muster.’ ” Ibid. (quoting
Bruen, 597 U. S., at 30). Gun regulations need only
“comport with the principles underlying the Second Amendment.”
Ante, at 7–8. These clarifying efforts are welcome, given
the many questions Bruen left unanswered.

															When this Court adopts a new legal standard, as we did in
Bruen, we do not do so in a vacuum. The tests we establish
bind lower court judges, who then apply those legal standards to
the cases before them. In my view, as this Court thinks of, and
speaks about, history’s relevance to the interpretation of
constitutional provisions, we should be mindful that our common-law
tradition of promoting clarity and consistency in the application
of our precedent also has a lengthy pedigree. So when courts
signal they are having trouble with one of our standards, we should
pay attention. Cf. Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan
Transit Authority, 469 U.S.
528, 538–539 (1985).

															The message that lower courts are sending now in Second
Amendment cases could not be clearer. They say there is little
method to Bruen’s madness.[1] It isn’t just that Bruen’s history-and-tradition
test is burdensome (though that is no small thing to courts with
heavier caseloads and fewer resources than we have). The more
worrisome concern is that lower courts appear to be diverging in
both approach and outcome as they struggle to conduct the inquiry
Bruen requires of them. Scholars report that lower courts
applying Bruen’s approach have been unable to produce
“consistent, principled results,” Brief for Second Amendment Law
Scholars as Amici Curiae 4, and, in fact, they “have come to
conflicting conclusions on virtually every consequential Second
Amendment issue to come before them,” id., at 4–5; see also
id., at 5–6 (collecting examples). Given this, it appears
indisputable that, after Bruen, “confusion plagu[es] the
lower courts.” Id., at 6.

															II

															This discord is striking when compared to the relative harmony
that had developed prior to Bruen. To be sure, our decision
in District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S.
570 (2008), which first recognized an individual right to keep
and bear arms for self-defense, see id., at 628, was
disruptive in its own way. After all, before Heller, “[t]he
meaning of the Second Amendment ha[d] been considered settled by
courts and legislatures for over two centuries,” and “judges and
legislators . . . properly believed . . . that
the Second Amendment did not reach possession of firearms for
purely private activities.” Id., at 676, n. 38
(Stevens, J., dissenting). Nonetheless, after Heller, lower
courts took up the necessary work of reviewing burdens on this
newly unearthed right. By the time this Court decided Bruen,
every court of appeals evaluating whether a firearm regulation was
consistent with the Second Amendment did so using a two-step
framework that incorporated means-end scrutiny. See Bruen,
597 U. S., at 103 (Breyer, J., dissenting).

															Rejecting that “two-step approach” as having “one step too
many,” id., at 19, the Bruen majority subbed in
another two-step evaluation. Courts must, first, determine whether
“the Second Amendment’s plain text covers an individual’s conduct.”
Id., at 24. If it does, “[t]he government must then justify
its regulation by demonstrating that it is consistent with the
Nation’s historical tradition of firearm regulation.”
Ibid.

															No one seems to question that “[h]istory has a role to play in
Second Amendment analysis.” Ante, at 4 (Sotomayor, J.,
concurring). But, per Bruen, courts evaluating a Second
Amendment challenge must consider history to the exclusion of
all else. This means legislators must locate and produce—and
courts must sift through—troves of centuries-old documentation
looking for supportive historical evidence.[2]

															This very case provides a prime example of the pitfalls of
Bruen’s approach. Having been told that a key marker of a
constitutional gun regulation is “a well-established and
representative historical analogue,” Bruen, 597 U. S.,
at 30 (emphasis deleted), Rahimi argued below that “there is little
or no historical evidence suggesting disarmament for those who
committed domestic violence; and there is certainly no tradition of
disarming people subject to a no-contact order related to domestic
violence.” Supp. Brief for Appellant in No. 21–11001 (CA5),
p. 15 (emphasis deleted). The Government then proffered what
it maintained were sufficient historical analogues to 18
U. S. C. §922(g)(8), including surety and going armed
laws. Supp. Brief for Appellee in No. 21–11001 (CA5), pp. 23,
n. 2, 27–31. But the Fifth Circuit concluded that the federal
statute was unconstitutional because the Government’s analogues
were not “ ‘relevantly similar.’ ” 61 F. 4th 443, 460–461
(2023).

															Neither the parties nor the Fifth Circuit had the benefit of
today’s decision, in which we hold that the Government had in fact
offered “ample evidence that the Second Amendment permits the
disarmament of individuals who pose a credible threat to the
physical safety of others.” Ante, at 8. But even setting
aside whether the historical examples the Government found were
sufficiently analogous, just canvassing the universe of historical
records and gauging the sufficiency of such evidence is an
exceedingly difficult task.[3]
Consistent analyses and outcomes are likely to remain elusive
because whether Bruen’s test is satisfied in a particular
case seems to depend on the suitability of whatever historical
sources the parties can manage to cobble together, as well as the
level of generality at which a court evaluates those
sources—neither of which we have as yet adequately clarified.

															And the unresolved questions hardly end there. Who is protected
by the Second Amendment, from a historical perspective? To what
conduct does the Second Amendment’s plain text apply? To what
historical era (or eras) should courts look to divine a historical
tradition of gun regulation? How many analogues add up to a
tradition? Must there be evidence that those analogues were
enforced or subject to judicial scrutiny? How much support can
nonstatutory sources lend? I could go on—as others have. See,
e.g., United States v. Daniels, 77 F.
4th 337, 358–360 (CA5 2023) (Higginson, J., concurring) (providing
a similarly nonexhaustive list). But I won’t.

															III

															Maybe time will resolve these and other key questions. Maybe
appellate courts, including ours, will find a way to “[b]rin[g]
discipline to the increasingly erratic and unprincipled body of law
that is emerging after Bruen.” J. Blocher E. Ruben,
Originalism-by-Analogy and Second Amendment Adjudication, 133 Yale
L. J. 99, 174 (2023). Indeed, “[m]any constitutional standards
involve undoubted gray areas,” and “it normally might be fair to
venture the assumption that case-by-case development [will] lead to
a workable standard.” Garcia, 469 U. S., at 540
(internal quotation marks and alteration omitted). By underscoring
that gun regulations need only “comport with the principles
underlying the Second Amendment,” ante, at 7–8 (emphasis
added), today’s opinion inches that ball forward.

															But it is becoming increasingly obvious that there are miles to
go.[4] Meanwhile, the Rule of
Law suffers. That ideal—key to our democracy—thrives on legal
standards that foster stability, facilitate consistency, and
promote predictability. So far, Bruen’s history-focused test
ticks none of those boxes.

															*  *  *

															I concur in today’s decision applying Bruen. But, in my
view, the Court should also be mindful of how its legal standards
are actually playing out in real life. We must remember that
legislatures, seeking to implement meaningful reform for their
constituents while simultaneously respecting the Second Amendment,
are hobbled without a clear, workable test for assessing the
constitutionality of their proposals. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 54–57;
cf. Bruen, 597 U. S., at 90–91 (Breyer, J.,
dissenting). And courts, which are currently at sea when it comes
to evaluating firearms legislation, need a solid anchor for
grounding their constitutional pronouncements. The public, too,
deserves clarity when this Court interprets our Constitution.

Notes
1
 See, e.g.,
Barris v. Stroud Twp., ___ Pa. ___, ___, 310 A.3d
175, 190 (2024) (“[M]ore guidance in this challenging and
ever-shifting area of the law is welcome”); State v.
Wilson, 154 Haw. 8, 21, 543 P.3d 440, 453 (2024) (“[B]y
turning the test into history and nothing else, [Bruen]
dismantles workable methods to interpret firearms laws”); United
States v. Dubois, 94 F. 4th 1284, 1293 (CA11 2024) (“We
require clearer instruction from the Supreme Court before we may
reconsider the constitutionality of [18 U. S. C.
§]922(g)(1)”); United States v. Daniels, 77 F. 4th
337, 358 (CA5 2023) (Higginson, J., concurring) (“[C]ourts,
operating in good faith, are struggling at every stage of the
Bruen inquiry. Those struggles encompass numerous, often
dispositive, difficult questions”); Atkinson v.
Garland, 70 F. 4th 1018, 1024 (CA7 2023) (“[T]he historical
analysis required by Bruen will be difficult and no doubt
yield some measure of indeterminancy”); id., at 1036 (Wood,
J., dissenting) (“As other courts have begun to apply Bruen,
[the] need for further research and further guidance has become
clear”); Gonyo v. D. S., 210
N. Y. S. 3d 612, 615, 2024 N. Y. Slip Op. 24018
(Jan. 19, 2024) (“Interpretations and applications of Bruen
by lower courts have been widely divergent and thus, very difficult
to apply as precedent”); United States v.
Sing-Ledezma, ___ F. Supp. 3d ___, ___, 2023 WL 8587869, *3
(WD Tex. Dec. 11, 2023) (“[T]he Court pauses to join the choir of
lower courts urging the Supreme Court to resolve the many
unanswered questions left in Bruen’s wake”); United
States v. Bartucci, 658 F. Supp. 3d 794, 800 (ED Cal.
2023) (“[T]he unique test the Supreme Court announced in
Bruen does not provide lower courts with clear guidance as
to how analogous modern laws must be to founding-era gun laws. In
the short time post-Bruen, this has caused disarray among
the lower courts”); United States v. Bullock, 679
F. Supp. 3d 501, 534 (SD Miss. 2023) (raising
methodological questions “in hopes that future judges and justices
can answer them with enough detail to enable trial courts to
perform their duties”); Fraser v. Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 672 F. Supp. 3d
118, 137, n. 20 (ED Va. 2023) (“The Court is staffed by
lawyers who are neither trained nor experienced in making the
nuanced historical analyses called for by Bruen.
. . . The analytical construct specified by Bruen
is thus a difficult one for non-historians”); United States
v. Jackson, 661 F. Supp. 3d 392, 406 (Md. 2023) (noting
“the challenges created by Bruen’s assignment”); United
States v. Love, 647 F. Supp. 3d 664, 670 (ND Ind.
2022) (“By . . . announcing an inconsistent and amorphous
standard, the Supreme Court has created mountains of work for
district courts that must now deal with Bruen-related
arguments in nearly every criminal case in which a firearm is
found”).
2
 It is not clear what
qualifies policymakers or their lawyers (who do not ordinarily have
the specialized education, knowledge, or training of professional
historians) to engage in this kind of assessment. And dutiful
legislators are not the only stakeholders who are far outside their
depth: Bruen also conscripts parties and judges into service
as amateur historians, casting about for similar historical
circumstances.
3
 The mad scramble for
historical records that Bruen requires also suggests that
only those solutions that States implemented in the distant past
comport with the Constitution. That premise is questionable
because, given the breadth of some of the Constitution’s
provisions, it is likely that the Founders understood that new
solutions would be needed over time, even for traditional problems,
and that the principles they were adopting would allow for such
flexibility. See District of Columbia v. Heller,
554 U.S.
570, 722 (2008) (Breyer, J., dissenting) (expressing doubt that
the Framers “intended future generations to ignore [modern-day]
matters”). It stifles both helpful innovation and democratic
engagement to read the Constitution to prevent advancement in this
way. In any event, what we see now is that Bruen’s
history-and-tradition test is not only limiting legislative
solutions, it also appears to be creating chaos.
4
 Extremely pertinent
inquiries relevant to consistent application of Bruen’s
standard await resolution. For example, in Bruen we
acknowledged the existence of “an ongoing scholarly debate on
whether courts should primarily rely on the prevailing
understanding of an individual right when the Fourteenth Amendment
was ratified in 1868 when defining its scope (as well as the scope
of the right against the Federal Government).” 597 U. S., at
37. We saw no need to address the issue in Bruen.
Id., at 38. We similarly decline to resolve that dispute
today. Ante, at 8, n. 1.


