::decision_cite:: 22-976
::decision_name::  Garland v. Cargill
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–976

															_________________

															MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL, et al.,
PETITIONERS v. MICHAEL CARGILL

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 14, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, dissenting.

															On October 1, 2017, a shooter opened fire from a
hotel room overlooking an outdoor concert in Las Vegas, Nevada, in
what would become the deadliest mass shooting in U. S.
history. Within a matter of minutes, using several hundred rounds
of ammunition, the shooter killed 58 people and wounded over 500.
He did so by affixing bump stocks to commonly available,
semiautomatic rifles. These simple devices harness a rifle’s recoil
energy to slide the rifle back and forth and repeatedly “bump” the
shooter’s stationary trigger finger, creating rapid fire. All the
shooter had to do was pull the trigger and press the gun forward.
The bump stock did the rest.

															Congress has sharply restricted civilian
ownership of machineguns since 1934. Federal law defines a
“machinegun” as a weapon that can shoot “automatically more than
one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.” 26 U. S. C. §5845(b). Shortly after the Las
Vegas massacre, the Trump administration, with widespread
bipartisan support, banned bump stocks as machineguns under the
statute.

															Today, the Court puts bump stocks back in
civilian hands. To do so, it casts aside Congress’s definition of
“machinegun” and seizes upon one that is inconsistent with the
ordinary meaning of the statutory text and unsupported by context
or purpose. When I see a bird that walks like a duck, swims like a
duck, and quacks like a duck, I call that bird a duck. A
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle fires “automatically more
than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of
the trigger.” §5845(b). Because I, like Congress, call that a
machinegun, I respectfully dissent.

															I

															A

															Machineguns were originally developed in the
19th century as weapons of war. See J. Ellis, The Social History of
the Machine Gun 21–45 (1986) (Ellis). Smaller and lighter
submachine guns were not commercially available until the 1920s.
See Brief for Patrick J. Charles as Amicus Curiae 5 (Charles
Brief ). Although these weapons were originally marketed to
law enforcement, they inevitably made it into the hands of
gangsters. See id., at 8–9; Ellis 149–165. Gangsters like Al
Capone used machineguns to rob banks, ambush the police, and murder
rivals. See Ellis 153–154, 157–158. Newspaper headlines across the
country flashed “ ‘Gangsters Use Machine Guns,’ ”
“ ‘Machine Gun Used in Bank Hold-Up,’ ” and
“ ‘Machine Gun Thugs Kill Postal Employee.’ ” Charles
Brief 9.

															Congress responded in 1934 by sharply
restricting civilian ownership of machineguns. See National
Firearms Act of 1934, §§3–6, 48Stat. 1236, 1237–1238. The Senate
Report explaining the 1934 Act emphasized that the “gangster as a
law violator must be deprived of his most dangerous weapon, the
machine gun.” S. Rep. No. 1444, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., 1–2.
“[W]hile there is justification for permitting the citizen to keep
a pistol or revolver for his own
protection . . . , there is no reason why
anyone except a law officer should have a machine gun.” Id.,
at 2.

															These early machineguns allowed a shooter to
fire in a variety of ways. Some would fire continuously with a
single pull of the trigger or push of a button. See Charles Brief
7, and n. 12 (noting that a Browning M1918 rifle fired eight
rounds “ ‘in a second with one pull of the trigger’ ”);
see also Brief for Petitioners 22 (noting that a Browning M2 fired
with a push of the thumb). Others, such as the famous Thompson
Submachine Gun Caliber .45, or “Tommy Gun,” would fire continuously
only so long as the shooter maintained backward pressure on the
trigger; a shooter could still fire single shots by pulling and
releasing the trigger each time. See Test of Thompson Submachine
Gun, 69 Army and Navy Register 355 (Apr. 9, 1921) (noting that the
shooter of a Tommy Gun “can fire the contents of the magazine with
a single prolonged pull or fire a single shot by merely releasing
the trigger”). The internal mechanisms of automatic-fire weapons
also varied enormously, with many (such as the Tommy Gun) relying
principally on the recoil energy produced by each bullet’s
discharge to effectuate automatic fire. See, e.g.,
War Dept., Basic Field Manual: Thompson Submachine Gun, Caliber
.45, M1928A1, p. 1 (1941) (“The Thompson submachine gun
. . . is an air-cooled, recoil-operated, magazine-fed
weapon”); W. Smith, Small Arms of the World: The Basic Manual of
Military Small Arms 165 (1955) (describing Tommy guns as “recoil
operated weapons on the elementary blowback principle”).

															To account for these differences, Congress
adopted a definition of “machinegun” that captured “any weapon
which shoots, or is designed to shoot, automatically
. . . more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a
single function of the trigger.” National Firearms Act, 48Stat.
1236. That essential definition still governs today. See 26
U. S. C. §5845(b).[1]

															B

															The archetypal modern “machinegun” is the
military’s standard-issue M16 assault rifle. With an M16 in
automatic mode, the shooter pulls the trigger once to achieve a
fire rate of 700 to 950 rounds per minute. See Dept. of Defense,
Defense Logistics Agency, Small Arms, https://www.
dla.mil/Disposition-Services/Offers/ Law- Enforcement /
Weapons/. An internal mechanism automates the M16’s continuous
fire, so that all the shooter has to do is keep backward pressure
on the trigger. See Brief for Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun
Violence et al. as Amici Curiae 9–11 (Giffords
Brief ) (discussing internal firing mechanism of M16). If the
shooter stops putting pressure on the trigger, the gun stops
firing.

															Semiautomatic weapons are not “machineguns”
under the statute. Take, for instance, an AR–15-style semiautomatic
assault rifle. To rapidly fire an AR–15, a shooter must rapidly
pull the trigger himself. It is “semi” automatic because, although
the rifle automatically loads a new cartridge into the chamber
after it is fired, it fires only one shot each time the shooter
pulls the trigger. See 18 U. S. C. §921(a)(29) (2018 ed.,
Supp. IV).

															To fire an M16 or AR–15 rifle, a person
typically holds the “grip” next to the trigger with his firing
hand. He stabilizes the weapon with his other hand on its barrel or
“front grip.” He then raises the weapon so that the butt, or
“stock,” of the gun rests against his shoulder, lines up the sights
to look down the gun, and squeezes the trigger. See Dept. of the
Army, Field Manual 23–9, Rifle Marksmanship M16A1, M16A2/3, M16A4,
and M4 Carbine, Ch. 4, Section III, p. 4-22 (Sept. 13, 2006)
(M16 Field Manual). A regular person with an AR–15 can achieve a
fire rate of around 60 rounds per minute, with one pull of the
trigger per second. Tr. of Oral Arg. 39. A professional sport
shooter can use the AR–15 to fire at a rate of up to 180 rounds per
minute, pulling the trigger three times per second. Giffords Brief
14.

															A shooter can also manually “bump” an AR–15 to
increase the rate of fire by using a belt loop or rubber band to
hold his trigger finger in place and harness the recoil from the
first shot to fire the rifle continuously. See 83 Fed. Reg.
66532–66533 (2018). To use a belt loop, he must hold the rifle low
against his hip, put his finger in the trigger guard, and then loop
his finger through a belt loop on his pants to lock the finger in
place. See id., at 66533. With his other hand, he then
pushes the rifle forward until his stationary finger engages the
trigger to fire the first shot. See ibid. The recoil from
that shot pushes the rifle violently backward. See ibid. If
the shooter keeps pressing the rifle forward against the finger in
his belt loop, the repeated backward jump of the recoil combined
with his forward pressure allows the rifle to fire continuously.
See ibid. A shooter using this method, however, cannot shoot
very precisely. He has neither the advantage of the sights to line
up his shot, nor his shoulder to stabilize the recoil. A shooter
can also use a rubber band or zip tie to tie a finger close to the
trigger. See id., at 66532. If the shooter is strong and
skilled enough physically to control the distance and direction of
the rifle’s significant recoil, the rifle will fire
continuously.

															A bump stock automates and stabilizes the bump
firing process. It replaces a rifle’s standard stock, which is the
part held against the shoulder. See id., at 66516. A bump
stock, unlike a standard stock, allows the rifle’s upper assembly
to slide back and forth in the stock. See ibid. It also
typically includes a finger rest on which the shooter can place his
finger while shooting, and a “receiver module” that guides and
regulates the weapon’s recoil. Ibid. To fire a semiautomatic
rifle equipped with a bump stock, the shooter either pulls the
trigger, see ibid., or slides the gun forward in the bump
stock, which presses the trigger into his trigger finger,
Cargill v. Barr, 502 F. Supp. 3d 1163, 1175 (WD
Tex. 2020). As long as the shooter keeps his trigger finger on the
finger rest and maintains constant forward pressure on the rifle’s
barrel or front grip, the weapon will fire continuously. See 83
Fed. Reg. 66516. A rifle equipped with a bump stock can fire at a
rate between 400 and 800 rounds per minute. Tr. of Oral Arg.
40.

															II

															A machinegun does not fire itself. The
important question under the statute is how a person can fire it. A
weapon is a “machinegun” when a shooter can (1) “by a single
function of the trigger,” (2) shoot “automatically more than one
shot, without manually reloading.” 26 U. S. C. §5845(b).
The plain language of that definition refers most obviously to a
rifle like an M16, where a single pull of the trigger provides
continuous fire as long as the shooter maintains backward pressure
on the trigger. The definition of “machinegun” also includes “any
part designed and intended . . . for use in converting a
weapon into a machinegun.” Ibid. That language naturally
covers devices like bump stocks, which “conver[t]” semiautomatic
rifles so that a single pull of the trigger provides continuous
fire as long as the shooter maintains forward pressure on the
gun.

															This is not a hard case. All of the textual
evidence points to the same interpretation. A bump-stock-equipped
semiautomatic rifle is a machinegun because (1) with a single pull
of the trigger, a shooter can (2) fire continuous shots without any
human input beyond maintaining forward pressure. The majority looks
to the internal mechanism that initiates fire, rather than the
human act of the shooter’s initial pull, to hold that a “single
function of the trigger” means a reset of the trigger mechanism.
Its interpretation requires six diagrams and an animation to
decipher the meaning of the statutory text. See ante, at
8–11, and n. 5. Then, shifting focus from the internal
mechanism of the gun to the perspective of the shooter, the
majority holds that continuous forward pressure is too much human
input for bump-stock-enabled continuous fire to be “automatic.” See
ante, at 14–17.

															The majority’s reading flies in the face of this
Court’s standard tools of statutory interpretation. By casting
aside the statute’s ordinary meaning both at the time of its
enactment and today, the majority eviscerates Congress’s regulation
of machineguns and enables gun users and manufacturers to
circumvent federal law.

															A

															Start with the phrase “single function of the
trigger.” All the tools of statutory interpretation, including
dictionary definitions, evidence of contemporaneous usage, and this
Court’s prior interpretation, point to that phrase meaning the
initiation of the firing sequence by an act of the shooter, whether
via a pull, push, or switch of the firing mechanism. The majority
nevertheless interprets “function of the trigger” as “the mode of
action by which the trigger activates the firing mechanism.”
Ante, at 7. Because in a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic
rifle, the trigger’s internal mechanism must reset each time a
weapon fires, the majority reads each reset as a new “function.”
That reading fixates on a firearm’s internal mechanics while
ignoring the human act on the trigger referenced by the
statute.

															Consider the relevant dictionary definitions. In
1934, when Congress passed the National Firearms Act, “function”
meant “the mode of action by which [something] fulfils its
purpose.” 4 Oxford English Dictionary 602 (1933). A “trigger” meant
the “movable catch or lever” that “sets some force or mechanism in
action.” 11 id., at 357. The majority agrees with those
definitions. Ante, at 7. It errs, however, by maintaining a
myopic focus on a trigger’s mechanics rather than on how a shooter
uses a trigger to initiate fire. Ibid.

															Nothing about those definitions suggests that
“function of the trigger” means the mechanism by which the trigger
resets mechanically to fire a second shot. See ante, at 8–11
(explaining the interior mechanics of an AR–15 trigger mechanism),
as opposed to the process that a pull of the trigger on a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle sets in motion. The most
important “function” of a “trigger” is what it enables a shooter to
do; what “force or mechanism” it sets “in action.” 11 Oxford
English Dictionary, at 357. A “single function of the trigger” more
naturally means a single initiation of the firing sequence.
Regardless of what is happening in the internal mechanics of a
firearm, if a shooter must activate the trigger only a single time
to initiate a firing sequence that will shoot “automatically more
than one shot,” that firearm is a “machinegun.” §5845(b).

															Evidence of contemporaneous usage overwhelmingly
supports that interpretation. The term “ ‘function of the
trigger’ ” was proposed by the president of the National Rifle
Association (NRA) during a hearing on the National Firearms Act
before the House. See National Firearms Act: Hearings on H. R.
9066 before the House Committee on Ways and Means, 73d Cong., 2d
Sess., 38–40 (1934). He understood the “distinguishing feature of a
machine gun [to be] that by a single pull of the trigger the gun
continues to fire.” Id., at 40. He emphasized that a firearm
“which is capable of firing more than one shot by a single pull of
the trigger, a single function of the trigger, is properly regarded
. . . as a machine gun.” Ibid. Distinguishing a
machinegun from a pistol, the NRA president emphasized that for a
pistol “[y]ou must release the trigger and pull it again for the
second shot to be fired.” Id., at 41. He did not say “the
hammer slips off the disconnector just as the square point of the
trigger rises into the notch on the hammer . . . thereby
reset[ting the trigger mechanism] to the original position.”
Ante, at 11. He instead emphasized the action of the
shooter, who must repeatedly activate the trigger for each shot.
Predictably, the House and Senate Reports reflect the same
understanding of the phrase. See H. R. Rep. No. 1780, 73d
Cong., 2d Sess., 2 (1934) (reporting that the statute “contains the
usual definition of machine gun as a weapon designed to shoot more
than one shot without reloading and by a single pull of the
trigger”); S. Rep. No. 1444, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., 2 (1934)
(same).

															The majority cannot disregard these statements
as evidence of legislative purpose.[2] They are, along with contemporaneous dictionary
definitions, some of the best evidence of contemporaneous
understanding. Cf. McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U.S.
742, 828 (2010) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment) (“Statements by legislators can assist . . .
to the extent they demonstrate the manner in which the public used
or understood a particular word or phrase”). Indeed, at oral
argument, when asked what evidence there was “that as of 1934, the
ordinary understanding of the phrase ‘function of the trigger’
referred to the mechanics of the gun rather than . . .
the shooter’s motion,” respondent’s lawyer could not point to a
single piece of evidence that supports the majority’s reading. Tr.
of Oral Arg. 98; see id., at 98–101. He even agreed that
Congress used the word “function” to ensure that the statute
covered a wide variety of trigger mechanisms, including both push
and pull triggers. Id., at 101–102. In short, the majority
disregards the unrefuted evidence of the text’s ordinary and
contemporaneous meaning, substituting instead its own understanding
of the internal mechanics of an AR–15 without looking at the
actions of the shooter.

															This Court itself has also previously read the
definition of “machinegun” in this exact statute to refer to the
action of the shooter rather than the firing mechanism. In
Staples v. United States, 511
U.S. 600 (1994), the Court noted that “a weapon that fires
repeatedly with a single pull of the trigger” is a
machinegun, as opposed to “a weapon that fires only one shot with
each pull of the trigger,” which is (at most) a semiautomatic
firearm. Id., at 602, n. 1 (emphasis added). A “pull”
of the trigger necessarily requires human input.

															When a shooter initiates the firing sequence on
a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle, he does so with “a
single function of the trigger” under that term’s ordinary meaning.
Just as the shooter of an M16 need only pull the trigger and
maintain backward pressure (on the trigger), a shooter of a
bump-stock-equipped AR–15 need only pull the trigger and maintain
forward pressure (on the gun). Both shooters pull the trigger only
once to fire multiple shots. The only difference is that for an
M16, the shooter’s backward pressure makes the rifle fire
continuously because of an internal mechanism: The curved lever of
the trigger does not move. In a bump-stock-equipped AR–15, the
mechanism for continuous fire is external: The shooter’s forward
pressure moves the curved lever back and forth against his
stationary trigger finger. Both rifles require only one initial
action (that is, one “single function of the trigger”) from the
shooter combined with continuous pressure to activate continuous
fire.[3]

															The majority resists this ordinary understanding
of the term “function of the trigger” with two technical
arguments.[4] First, it
attempts to contrast the action required to fire an M16 from that
required to fire a bump-stock-equipped AR–15. The majority argues
that “holding the trigger down on a fully automatic rifle is not
manual input in addition to a trigger’s function—it is what causes
the trigger to function in the first place” whereas “pushing on the
front grip [of a bump-stock equipped semiautomatic rifle] will not
cause the weapon to fire unless the shooter also engages the
trigger with his other hand.” Ante, at 16. The shooter of a
bump-stock-equipped AR–15, however, need not “pull” the trigger to
fire. Instead, he need only place a finger on the finger rest and
push forward on the front grip or barrel with his other hand.
Instead of pulling the trigger, the forward motion pushes the bump
stock into his finger.

															Second, the majority tries to cabin “single
function of the trigger” to a single mechanism for activating
continuous fire. See ante, at 14–15. A shooter can fire a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle in two ways. First, he can
choose to fire single shots via distinct pulls of the trigger
without exerting any additional pressure. Second, he can fire
continuously via maintaining constant forward pressure on the
barrel or front grip. The majority holds that the forward pressure
cannot constitute a “single function of the trigger” because a
shooter can also fire single shots by pulling the trigger. That
logic, however, would also exclude a Tommy Gun and an M16, the
paradigmatic examples of regulated machineguns in 1934 and today.
Both weapons can fire either automatically or semiautomatically. A
shooter using a Tommy Gun in automatic mode could choose to fire
single shots with distinct pulls of the trigger, or continuous
shots by maintaining constant backward pressure on the trigger. See
supra, at 3. An M16 user can toggle the weapon from
semiautomatic mode, which allows only one shot per pull of the
trigger, to automatic mode, which enables continuous fire. See M16
Field Manual, Section III, p. 4-8. In 1934 as now, there is no
commonsense difference between a firearm where a shooter must hold
down a trigger or flip a switch to initiate rapid fire and one
where a shooter must push on the front grip or barrel to do the
same.

															The majority’s logic simply does not overcome
the overwhelming textual and contextual evidence that “single
function of the trigger” means a single action by the shooter to
initiate a firing sequence, including pulling a trigger and pushing
forward on a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle.

															B

															Next, consider what makes a machinegun
“automatic.” A bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle is a
“machinegun” because with a “single function of the trigger” it
“shoot[s], automatically more than one shot, without manual
reloading.” §5845(b). Put simply, the bump stock automates the
process of firing more than one shot.

															Before automatic weapons, a person who wanted to
fire multiple shots from a firearm had to do two things after
pulling the trigger the first time: (1) he had to reload the gun;
and (2) he had to pull the trigger again. A semiautomatic weapon
like an AR–15 already automates the first process. The bump stock
automates the second.[5] In a
fully automatic rifle like an M16, that automation is internal.
After a shooter pulls the trigger, if he maintains continuous
backward pressure on the trigger, the curved lever itself will not
move. Instead, an internal mechanism allows continuous fire. On a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle, the automation is
external. After a shooter pulls the trigger, if he maintains
continuous forward pressure on the gun, the bump stock harnesses
the recoil to move the curved lever back and forth against his
finger. That external automated motion creates continuous fire.

															When a shooter “bump” fires a semiautomatic
weapon without a bump stock, he must control several things using
his own strength and skill: (1) the backward recoil of each
shot, including both the direction in which the rifle moves and how
far it moves when recoiling; (2) the trigger finger, by
maintaining a stationary position with a loose enough hold on the
trigger that the rapidly moving gun will hit his finger each time;
and (3) the forward motion of the rifle after it recoils
backward. A bump stock automates those processes. The replacement
stock controls the direction and distance of the recoil, and the
finger rest obviates the need to maintain a stationary finger
position. All a shooter must do is rest his finger and press
forward on the front grip or barrel for the rifle to fire
continuously.

															The majority nevertheless concludes that a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle requires too much human
input to fire “automatic[ally]” because it requires the “proper
amount of forward pressure on the front grip” to maintain
continuous fire. Ante, at 16. “Automati[c],” however, does
not mean zero human input. An M16 requires the shooter to exert the
“proper amount of [backward] pressure on the” trigger to maintain
continuous fire. Ibid. So, too, a machinegun that requires a
user to hold down a button. Makers of automatic weapons may require
continuous human input for safety purposes; an accidental trigger
pull that activates rapid fire is less harmful if it does not
require affirmative human action to stop. Requiring continuous
pressure for continuous fire, however, does not prevent a firearm
from “shoot[ing], automatically more than one shot.” §5845(b).

															C

															This Court has repeatedly avoided
interpretations of a statute that would facilitate its ready
“evasion” or “enable offenders to elude its provisions in the most
easy manner.” The Emily, 9 Wheat. 381, 389–390 (1824); see
also Abramski v. United States, 573 U.S.
169, 181–182, 185 (2014) (declining to read a gun statute in a
way that would permit ready “evasion,” “defeat the point” of the
law, or “easily bypass the scheme”). Justice Scalia called this
interpretive principle the “presumption against ineffectiveness.”
A. Scalia & B. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal
Texts 63 (2012). The majority arrogates Congress’s policymaking
role to itself by allowing bump-stock users to circumvent
Congress’s ban on weapons that shoot rapidly via a single action of
the shooter.

															“The presumption against ineffectiveness ensures
that a text’s manifest purpose is furthered, not hindered.”
Ibid. Before machineguns, a shooter could fire a gun only as
fast as his finger could pull the trigger. Congress sought to
restrict the civilian use of machineguns because they eliminated
the need for a person rapidly to pull the trigger himself to fire
continuously. A bump stock serves that function. Even a skilled
sport shooter can fire an AR–15 at a rate of only 180 rounds per
minute by rapidly pulling the trigger. Anyone shooting a
bump-stock-equipped AR–15 can fire at a rate between 400 and 800
rounds per minute with a single pull of the trigger.

															Moreover, bump stocks are not the only devices
that transform semiautomatic rifles into weapons capable of rapid
fire with a single function of the trigger. Recognizing the
creativity of gun owners and manufacturers, Congress wrote a
statute “loaded with anticircumvention devices.” Tr. of Oral Arg.
68. The definition of “machinegun” captures “any weapon which
shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot,
automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a
single function of the trigger.” §5845(b). Not “more than four,
five, or six shots,” not “single pull” or “single push” of the
trigger.” Following that definition, the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has reasonably classified
many transformative devices other than bump stocks as
“machinegun[s].”[6] For
instance, ATF has long classified “forced reset triggers” as
machineguns. See Brief for Petitioners 28. A forced reset trigger
includes a device that forces the trigger back downward after the
shooter’s initial pull, repeatedly pushing the curved lever against
the shooter’s stationary trigger finger. See ibid. To a
shooter, a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a forced reset trigger
feels much like an M16. He must pull the trigger only once and then
maintain pressure to achieve continuous fire. See ibid.

															Gun owners themselves also have built motorized
devices that will repeatedly pull a semiautomatic firearm’s curved
lever to enable continuous fire. ATF has classified such devices as
“machinegun[s]” since 1982. See Record 1077. In 2003, the Fifth
Circuit held that such a contraption qualified as a “machinegun”
under the statute. See United States v. Camp,

343 F.3d 743, 745. An owner of a semiautomatic rifle had placed
a fishing reel inside the weapon’s trigger guard. Id., at
744. When he pulled a switch behind the original trigger, the
switch supplied power to a motor connected to the fishing reel.
Ibid. The motor caused the reel to rotate, and that rotation
manipulated the curved lever, causing it to fire in rapid
succession. Ibid. ATF in 2017 also classified as a
“machinegun” a wearable glove that a shooter could activate to
initiate a mechanized piston moving back and forth, repeatedly
pulling and releasing a semiautomatic rifle’s curved lever. See
Record 1074–1076.[7]

															The majority tosses aside the presumption
against ineffectiveness, claiming that its interpretation only
“draws a line more narrowly than one of [Congress’s] conceivable
statutory purposes might suggest” because the statute still
regulates “all traditional machineguns” like M16s. Ante, at
18. Congress’s ban on M16s, however, is far less effective if a
shooter can instead purchase a bump stock or construct a device
that enables his AR–15 to fire at the same rate. Even bump-stock
manufacturers recognize that they are exploiting a loophole, with
one bragging on its website “Bumpfire Stocks are the closest you
can get to full auto and still be legal.” Midsouth Shooters,
BUMPFIRE SYSTEMS,
https://www.midsouthshooterssupply.com/b/bumpfire- systems. The
majority creates a definition of the statute that bans only
“traditional” machineguns, even though its definition renders
Congress’s clear intent readily evadable.

															Every Member of the majority has previously
emphasized that the best way to respect congressional intent is to
adhere to the ordinary understanding of the terms Congress uses.
See, e.g., Jam v. International Finance
Corp., 586 U.S. 199, 209 (2019) (Roberts, C. J., for the
Court) (“ ‘[T]he legislative purpose is expressed by the
ordinary meaning of the words used’ ”); Gross v. FBL
Financial Services, Inc., 557 U.S.
167, 175 (2009) (Thomas, J., for the Court) (“ ‘Statutory
construction must begin with the language employed by Congress and
the assumption that the ordinary meaning of that language
accurately expresses the legislative purpose’ ”); Wall
v. Kholi, 562 U.S.
545, 551 (2011) (Alito, J., for the Court) (“ ‘We give the
words of a statute their ordinary, contemporary, common meaning,
absent an indication Congress intended them to bear some different
import’ ”); BP p.l.c. v. Mayor and City Council of
Baltimore, 593 U.S. 230, 237 (2021) (Gorsuch, J., for the
Court) (“When called on to interpret a statute, this Court
generally seeks to discern and apply the ordinary meaning of its
terms at the time of their adoption”); Sackett v.
EPA, 598 U.S. 651, 723, 727 (2023) (Kavanaugh, J.,
concurring in judgment) (reasoning that departing from “all
indications of ordinary meaning” will “create regulatory
uncertainty for the Federal Government . . . and
regulated parties”); Bartenwerfer v. Buckley, 598
U.S. 69, 77, 83 (2023) (Barrett, J., for the Court) (declining to
“artificially narrow ordinary meaning” to “second-guess
[Congress’s] judgment”). Today, the majority forgets that principle
and substitutes its own view of what constitutes a “machinegun” for
Congress’s.

															*  *  *

															Congress’s definition of “machinegun”
encompasses bump stocks just as naturally as M16s. Just like a
person can shoot “automatically more than one shot” with an M16
through a “single function of the trigger” if he maintains
continuous backward pressure on the trigger, he can do the same
with a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle if he maintains
forward pressure on the gun. §5845(b). Today’s decision to reject
that ordinary understanding will have deadly consequences. The
majority’s artificially narrow definition hamstrings the
Government’s efforts to keep machineguns from gunmen like the Las
Vegas shooter. I respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
 Congress has twice
strengthened the regulation of machineguns over the years without
substantially updating the definition. See Gun Control Act of 1968,
82Stat. 1213 (expanding registration requirements and strengthening
criminal penalties); Firearms Owners’ Protection Act, 100Stat.
452–453 (making it a federal crime “ ‘to transfer or possess a
machinegun’ ”).
2
 Of course, “authoritative
legislative history can be useful, even when the meaning can be
discerned from the statute’s language, to reinforce or to confirm a
court’s sense of the text.” R. Katzmann, Judging Statutes 35
(2014).
3
 The majority thinks that
this logic should apply just as well to manual bump firing.
Ante, at 14. As described supra, at 5, and
infra, at 13, however, bump firing requires much more from
the shooter than the simple forward pressure required to fire a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle.
4
 The majority claims that
these arguments explain only “why, even assuming a semiautomatic
rifle equipped with a bump stock could fire more than one shot by a
single function of the trigger, it could not do so
‘automatically.’ ” Ante, at 13, n. 6. That is
correct, as far as the majority’s reasoning goes. The majority
defines “ ‘single function of the trigger’ ” as a reset
of a rifle’s internal trigger mechanism. Ante, at 11. A more
accurate definition is the human action required to initiate the
firing sequence. Supra, at 7–10. The majority’s argument for
why “something more than a ‘single function of the trigger’ is
required to fire multiple shots,” ante, at 15, is therefore
relevant to both its discussion of “automatically” and my
discussion of “single function of the trigger.”
5
 The majority attempts to
analogize a bump stock to the Model 37 shotgun, which allows the
user to “fire multiple shots by holding down the trigger while
operating the shotgun’s pump action.” Ante, at 16. The Model
37 automates the second process (i.e., pulling the
trigger for each shot), as long as the shooter maintains pressure
on the trigger. Unlike a semiautomatic rifle, however, the Model 37
does not automate the first, as the shooter “must manually operate
the pump action with his nontrigger hand” to “ejec[t ] the
spent cartridge and loa[d ] a new one into the chamber.”
Ibid.
6
 The majority emphasizes
that ATF previously took the position that certain bump-stock
devices were not “machinegun[s]” under the statute. See
ante, at 3, 19. ATF, however, has repeatedly classified
other devices that modify semiautomatic rifles by allowing a single
activation of the shooter to automate repeat fire as machineguns.
See, e.g., 83 Fed. Reg. 66518, n. 4 (referencing
ATF classifications of trigger reset devices); Akins v.
United States, 312 F. Appx. 197, 200–201 (CA11 2009)
(per curiam) (upholding classification of Akins
Accelerator, a spring-operated bump stock); United States v.
Camp, 
343 F.3d 743, 745 (CA5 2003) (upholding classification of
fishing reel attached to a rifle trigger that, upon activation,
repeatedly operated the curved lever of the rifle).
7
 Respondent does not today
challenge ATF’s classification of these devices as “machinegun[s].”
His lawyer noted at oral argument, however, that “forced reset
triggers” would be part of a category of “harder cases” where
“there may be a question as to what exactly the trigger is and then
how does that trigger function.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 82. That
ambiguity stems from the majority’s loophole for weapons that
require multiple mechanical actions to fire continuously, even when
a shooter initiates that fire with a single human
action.


