::decision_cite:: 22-976
::decision_name::  Garland v. Cargill
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–976

															_________________

															MERRICK B. GARLAND, ATTORNEY GENERAL, et al.,
PETITIONERS v. MICHAEL CARGILL

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 14, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Congress has long restricted access to
“ ‘machinegun[s],’ ” a category of firearms defined by
the ability to “shoot, automatically more than one shot
. . . by a single function of the trigger.” 26
U. S. C. §5845(b); see also 18 U. S. C.
§922(o). Semiautomatic firearms, which require shooters to
reengage the trigger for every shot, are not machineguns. This case
asks whether a bump stock—an accessory for a semiautomatic rifle
that allows the shooter to rapidly reengage the trigger (and
therefore achieve a high rate of fire)—converts the rifle into a
“machinegun.” We hold that it does not and therefore affirm.

															I

															A

															Under the National Firearms Act of 1934, a
“machinegun” is “any weapon which shoots, is designed to shoot, or
can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot,
without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger.”
§5845(b). The statutory definition also includes “any part designed
and intended . . . for use in converting a weapon into a
machinegun.” Ibid. With a machinegun, a shooter can fire
multiple times, or even continuously, by engaging the trigger only
once. This capability distinguishes a machinegun from a
semiautomatic firearm. With a semiautomatic firearm, the shooter
can fire only one time by engaging the trigger. The shooter must
release and reengage the trigger to fire another shot. Machineguns
can ordinarily achieve higher rates of fire than semiautomatic
firearms because the shooter does not need to release and reengage
the trigger between shots.

															Shooters have devised techniques for firing
semiautomatic firearms at rates approaching those of some
machineguns. One technique is called bump firing. A shooter who
bump fires a rifle uses the firearm’s recoil to help rapidly
manipulate the trigger. The shooter allows the recoil from one shot
to push the whole firearm backward. As the rifle slides back and
away from the shooter’s stationary trigger finger, the trigger is
released and reset for the next shot. Simultaneously, the shooter
uses his nontrigger hand to maintain forward pressure on the
rifle’s front grip. The forward pressure counteracts the recoil and
causes the firearm (and thus the trigger) to move forward and
“bump” into the shooter’s trigger finger. This bump reengages the
trigger and causes another shot to fire, and so on.

															Bump firing is a balancing act. The shooter must
maintain enough forward pressure to ensure that he will bump the
trigger with sufficient force to engage it. But, if the shooter
applies too much forward pressure, the rifle will not slide back
far enough to allow the trigger to reset. The right balance
produces a reciprocating motion that permits the shooter to
repeatedly engage and release the trigger in rapid succession.

															Although bump firing does not require any
additional equipment, there are accessories designed to make the
technique easier. A “bump stock” is one such accessory.[1] It replaces a semiautomatic rifle’s
stock (the back part of the rifle that rests against the shooter’s
shoulder) with a plastic casing that allows every other part of the
rifle to slide back and forth. This casing helps manage the
back-and-forth motion required for bump firing. A bump stock also
has a ledge to keep the shooter’s trigger finger stationary. A bump
stock does not alter the basic mechanics of bump firing. As with
any semiautomatic firearm, the trigger still must be released and
reengaged to fire each additional shot.

															B

															The question in this case is whether a bump
stock transforms a semiautomatic rifle into a “machinegun,” as
defined by §5845(b). For many years, the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) took the position that
semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks were not machineguns
under the statute. On more than 10 separate occasions over several
administrations, ATF consistently concluded that rifles equipped
with bump stocks cannot “automatically” fire more than one shot “by
a single function of the trigger.” See App. 16–68. In April 2017,
for example, ATF explained that a rifle equipped with a bump stock
does not “operat[e] automatically” because “forward pressure must
be applied with the support hand to the forward handguard.”
Id., at 66. And, because the shooter slides the rifle
forward in the stock “to fire each shot, each succeeding shot
fir[es] with a single trigger function.” Id., at 67.

															ATF abruptly reversed course in response to a
mass shooting in Las Vegas, Nevada. In October 2017, a gunman fired
on a crowd attending an outdoor music festival in Las Vegas,
killing 58 people and wounding over 500 more. The gunman equipped
his weapons with bump stocks, which allowed him to fire hundreds of
rounds in a matter of minutes.

															This tragedy created tremendous political
pressure to outlaw bump stocks nationwide. Within days, Members of
Congress proposed bills to ban bump stocks and other devices
“designed . . . to accelerate the rate of fire of a
semiautomatic rifle.” S. 1916, 115th Cong., 1st Sess., §2 (2017);
see also H. R. 3947, 115th Cong., 1st Sess. (2017); H. R.
3999, 115th Cong., 1st Sess. (2017). None of these bills became
law. Similar proposals in the intervening years have also stalled.
See, e.g., H. R. 396, 118th Cong., 1st Sess.
(2023); S. 1909, 118th Cong., 1st Sess. (2023); H. R.
5427, 117th Cong., 1st Sess. (2021).

															While the first wave of bills was pending, ATF
began considering whether to reinterpret §5845(b)’s definition of
“machinegun” to include bump stocks. It proposed a rule that would
amend its regulations to “clarify” that bump stocks are
machineguns. 83 Fed. Reg. 13442 (2018). ATF’s about-face drew
criticism from some observers, including those who agreed that bump
stocks should be banned. Senator Dianne Feinstein, for example,
warned that ATF lacked statutory authority to prohibit bump stocks,
explaining that the proposed regulation “ ‘hinge[d] on a
dubious analysis’ ” and that the “ ‘gun lobby and
manufacturers [would] have a field day with [ATF’s]
reasoning’ ” in court. Statement on Regulation To Ban Bump
Stocks (Mar. 23, 2018). She asserted that “ ‘legislation is
the only way to ban bump stocks.’ ” Ibid.

															ATF issued its final Rule in 2018. 83 Fed. Reg.
66514. The agency’s earlier regulations simply restated §5845(b)’s
statutory definition. Ibid. The final Rule amended those
regulations by adding the following language:

															“[T]he term ‘automatically’ as it modifies
‘shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to
shoot,’ means functioning as the result of a self-acting or
self-regulating mechanism that allows the firing of multiple rounds
through a single function of the trigger; and ‘single function of
the trigger’ means a single pull of the trigger and analogous
motions. The term ‘machinegun’ includes a bump-stock-type device,
i.e., a device that allows a semi-automatic firearm
to shoot more than one shot with a single pull of the trigger by
harnessing the recoil energy of the semi-automatic firearm to which
it is affixed so that the trigger resets and continues firing
without additional physical manipulation of the trigger by the
shooter.” Id., at 66553–66554.

															The final Rule also repudiated ATF’s previous
guidance that bump stocks did not qualify as “machineguns” under
§5845(b). Id., at 66530–66531. And, it ordered owners of
bump stocks to destroy them or surrender them to ATF within 90
days. Id., at 66530. Bump-stock owners who failed to comply
would be subject to criminal prosecution. Id., at 66525; see
also 18 U. S. C. §922(o)(1).

															C

															Michael Cargill surrendered two bump stocks to
ATF under protest. He then filed suit to challenge the final Rule,
asserting a claim under the Administrative Procedure Act. As
relevant, Cargill alleged that ATF lacked statutory authority to
promulgate the final Rule because bump stocks are not
“machinegun[s]” as defined in §5845(b). After a bench trial, the
District Court entered judgment for ATF. The court concluded that
“a bump stock fits the statutory definition of a
‘machinegun.’ ” Cargill v. Barr, 502
F. Supp. 3d 1163, 1194 (WD Tex. 2020).

															The Court of Appeals initially affirmed, 20
F. 4th 1004 (CA5 2021), but later reversed after rehearing en
banc, 57 F. 4th 447 (CA5 2023). A majority agreed, at a
minimum, that §5845(b) is ambiguous as to whether a semiautomatic
rifle equipped with a bump stock fits the statutory definition of a
machinegun. And, the majority concluded that the rule of lenity
required resolving that ambiguity in Cargill’s favor. Id.,
at 469; see also id., at 450, n. An eight-judge plurality
determined that the statutory definition of “machinegun”
unambiguously excludes such weapons. A semiautomatic rifle equipped
with a bump stock, the plurality reasoned, fires only one shot
“each time the trigger ‘acts,’ ” id., at 459, and so
does not fire “more than one shot . . . by a single
function of the trigger,” §5845(b). The plurality also concluded
that a bump stock does not enable a semiautomatic rifle to fire
more than one shot “automatically” because the shooter must
“maintain manual, forward pressure on the barrel.” Id., at
463.

															We granted certiorari, 601 U. S. ___
(2023), to address a split among the Courts of Appeals regarding
whether bump stocks meet §5845(b)’s definition of
“machinegun.”[2] We now
affirm.

															II

															Section 5845(b) defines a “machinegun” as any
weapon capable of firing “automatically more than one shot
. . . by a single function of the trigger.” We hold that
a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock is not a
“machinegun” because it cannot fire more than one shot “by a single
function of the trigger.” And, even if it could, it would not do so
“automatically.” ATF therefore exceeded its statutory authority by
issuing a Rule that classifies bump stocks as machineguns.

															A

															A semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump
stock does not fire more than one shot “by a single function of the
trigger.” With or without a bump stock, a shooter must release and
reset the trigger between every shot. And, any subsequent shot
fired after the trigger has been released and reset is the result
of a separate and distinct “function of the trigger.” All that a
bump stock does is accelerate the rate of fire by causing these
distinct “function[s]” of the trigger to occur in rapid
succession.

															As always, we start with the statutory text,
which refers to “a single function of the trigger.” The “function”
of an object is “the mode of action by which it fulfils its
purpose.” 4 Oxford English Dictionary 602 (1933); see also American
Heritage Dictionary 533 (1969) (“The natural or proper action for
which a . . . mechanism . . . is fitted or
employed”). And, a “trigger” is an apparatus, such as a “movable
catch or lever,” that “sets some force or mechanism in action.” 11
Oxford English Dictionary, at 357; see also American Heritage
Dictionary, at 1371 (“The lever pressed by the finger to discharge
a firearm” or “[a]ny similar device used to release or activate a
mechanism”); Webster’s New International Dictionary 2711 (2d ed.
1934) (“A piece, as a lever, connected with a catch or detent as a
means of releasing it; specif., Firearms, the part of a lock
moved by the finger to release the cock in firing”). The phrase
“function of the trigger” thus refers to the mode of action by
which the trigger activates the firing mechanism. For most
firearms, including the ones at issue here, the trigger is a curved
metal lever. On weapons with these standard trigger mechanisms, the
phrase “function of the trigger” means the physical trigger
movement required to shoot the firearm.

															No one disputes that a semiautomatic rifle
without a bump stock is not a machinegun because it fires only one
shot per “function of the trigger.” That is, engaging the trigger a
single time will cause the firing mechanism to discharge only one
shot. To understand why, it is helpful to consider the mechanics of
the firing cycle for a semiautomatic rifle. Because the statutory
definition is keyed to a “function of the trigger,” only the
trigger assembly is relevant for our purposes. Although trigger
assemblies for semiautomatic rifles vary, the basic mechanics are
generally the same. The following series of illustrations depicts
how the trigger assembly on an AR–15 style semiautomatic rifle
works.[3] In each illustration,
the front of the rifle (i.e., the barrel) would be
pointing to the left.

															We begin with an overview of the relevant
components:

															

															Figure 1.

															The trigger is a simple lever that moves
backward and forward. P. Sweeney, Gunsmithing the AR–15,
p. 131 (2016). The square point at the top left edge of the
trigger locks into a notch at the bottom of the hammer. P. Sweeney,
Gunsmithing: Rifles 269 (1999). The hammer is a spring-loaded part
that swings forward toward the barrel and strikes the firing pin,
causing a shot to fire. Ibid. The disconnector is the
component responsible for resetting the hammer to its original
position after a shot is fired. Ibid.

															We turn next to how these components
operate:

															

															Figure 2.

															When the shooter engages the trigger by moving
it backward (as indicated by the arrow), the square point of the
trigger pivots downward and out of the notch securing the hammer.
Ibid. This movement releases the spring-loaded hammer,
allowing it to swing forward. Ibid.

															

															Figure 3.

															At the top of the hammer’s rotation, it strikes
the firing pin, causing the weapon to fire a single shot. See
ibid.

															

															Figure 4.

															The firearm then ejects the spent cartridge from
the chamber and loads a new one in its place. D. Long, The Complete
AR–15/M16 Sourcebook 206 (2001). The mechanism that performs this
task swings the hammer backward at the same time. Ibid.

															

															Figure 5.

															As the hammer swings backward, it latches onto
the disconnector. Sweeney, Gunsmithing: Rifles, at 269. This
latching (circled above) prevents the hammer from swinging forward
again after a new cartridge is loaded into the chamber.
Ibid. The disconnector will hold the hammer in that position
for as long as the shooter holds the trigger back, thus preventing
the firearm from firing another shot.[4] Ibid.

															

															Figure 6.

															Finally, when the shooter takes pressure off the
trigger and allows it to move forward (as indicated by the arrow),
the hammer slips off the disconnector just as the square point of
the trigger rises into the notch on the hammer (circled above).
Ibid. The trigger mechanism is thereby reset to the original
position shown in Figure 1. A semiautomatic rifle must complete
this cycle for each shot fired.[5]

															ATF does not dispute that this complete process
is what constitutes a “single function of the trigger.” A shooter
may fire the weapon again after the trigger has reset, but only by
engaging the trigger a second time and thereby initiating a new
firing cycle. For each shot, the shooter must engage the trigger
and then release the trigger to allow it to reset. Any additional
shot fired after one cycle is the result of a separate and distinct
“function of the trigger.”

															Nothing changes when a semiautomatic rifle is
equipped with a bump stock. The firing cycle remains the same.
Between every shot, the shooter must release pressure from the
trigger and allow it to reset before reengaging the trigger for
another shot. A bump stock merely reduces the amount of time that
elapses between separate “functions” of the trigger. The bump stock
makes it easier for the shooter to move the firearm back toward his
shoulder and thereby release pressure from the trigger and reset
it. And, it helps the shooter press the trigger against his finger
very quickly thereafter. A bump stock does not convert a
semiautomatic rifle into a machinegun any more than a shooter with
a lightning-fast trigger finger does. Even with a bump stock, a
semiautomatic rifle will fire only one shot for every “function of
the trigger.” So, a bump stock cannot qualify as a machinegun under
§5845(b)’s definition.

															Although ATF agrees on a semiautomatic rifle’s
mechanics, it nevertheless insists that a bump stock allows a
semiautomatic rifle to fire multiple shots “by a single function of
the trigger.” ATF starts by interpreting the phrase “single
function of the trigger” to mean “a single pull of the trigger and
analogous motions.” 83 Fed. Reg. 66553. A shooter using a bump
stock, it asserts, must pull the trigger only one time to initiate
a bump-firing sequence of multiple shots. Id., at 66554.
This initial trigger pull sets off a sequence—fire, recoil, bump,
fire—that allows the weapon to continue firing “without additional
physical manipulation of the trigger by the shooter.” Ibid.
According to ATF, all the shooter must do is keep his trigger
finger stationary on the bump stock’s ledge and maintain constant
forward pressure on the front grip to continue firing. The dissent
offers similar reasoning. See post, at 7–9 (opinion of
Sotomayor, J.).

															This argument rests on the mistaken premise that
there is a difference between a shooter flexing his finger to pull
the trigger and a shooter pushing the firearm forward to bump the
trigger against his stationary finger. ATF and the dissent seek to
call the shooter’s initial trigger pull a “function of the trigger”
while ignoring the subsequent “bumps” of the shooter’s finger
against the trigger before every additional shot. But, §5845(b)
does not define a machinegun based on what type of human input
engages the trigger—whether it be a pull, bump, or something else.
Nor does it define a machinegun based on whether the shooter has
assistance engaging the trigger. The statutory definition instead
hinges on how many shots discharge when the shooter engages the
trigger. And, as we have explained, a semiautomatic rifle will fire
only one shot each time the shooter engages the trigger—with or
without a bump stock.[6]
Supra, at 7–12.

															In any event, ATF’s argument cannot succeed on
its own terms. The final Rule defines “function of the trigger” to
include not only “a single pull of the trigger” but also any
“analogous motions.” 83 Fed. Reg. 66553. ATF concedes that one such
analogous motion that qualifies as a single function of the trigger
is “sliding the rifle forward” to bump the trigger. Brief for
Petitioners 22. But, if that is true, then every bump is a separate
“function of the trigger,” and semiautomatic rifles equipped with
bump stocks are therefore not machineguns. ATF resists the natural
implication of its reasoning, insisting that the bumping motion is
a “function of the trigger” only when it initiates, but not when it
continues, a firing sequence. But, Congress did not write a
statutory definition of “machinegun” keyed to when a firing
sequence begins and ends. Section 5845(b) asks only whether a
weapon fires more than one shot “by a single function of the
trigger.”

															Finally, the position that ATF and the dissent
endorse is logically inconsistent. They reason that a semiautomatic
rifle equipped with a bump stock fires more than one shot by a
single function of the trigger because a shooter “need only pull
the trigger and maintain forward pressure” to “activate continuous
fire.” Post, at 10; see also Brief for Petitioners 23. If
that is correct, however, then the same should be true for a
semiautomatic rifle without a bump stock. After all, as the
dissent and ATF themselves acknowledge, a shooter manually bump
firing a semiautomatic rifle can achieve continuous fire by holding
his trigger finger stationary and maintaining forward pressure with
his nontrigger hand. See post, at 5; 83 Fed. Reg. 66533.
Yet, they agree that a semiautomatic rifle without a bump stock
“fires only one shot each time the shooter pulls the trigger.”
Post, at 4; see also 83 Fed. Reg. 66534. Their argument is
thus at odds with itself.

															We conclude that semiautomatic rifle equipped
with a bump stock is not a “machinegun” because it does not fire
more than one shot “by a single function of the trigger.”

															B

															A bump stock is not a “machinegun” for another
reason: Even if a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock could fire
more than one shot “by a single function of the trigger,” it would
not do so “automatically.” Section 5845(b) asks whether a weapon
“shoots . . . automatically more than one shot
. . . by a single function of the trigger.” The statute
thus specifies the precise action that must “automatically” cause a
weapon to fire “more than one shot”—a “single function of the
trigger.” If something more than a “single function of the trigger”
is required to fire multiple shots, the weapon does not satisfy the
statutory definition. As Judge Henderson put it, the “statutory
definition of ‘machinegun’ does not include a firearm that shoots
more than one round ‘automatically’ by a single pull of the trigger
AND THEN SOME.” Guedes v. Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 920 F.3d 1, 44 (CADC 2019)
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).

															Firing multiple shots using a semiautomatic
rifle with a bump stock requires more than a single function of the
trigger. A shooter must also actively maintain just the right
amount of forward pressure on the rifle’s front grip with his
nontrigger hand. See supra, at 2–3. Too much forward
pressure and the rifle will not slide back far enough to release
and reset the trigger, preventing the rifle from firing another
shot. Too little pressure and the trigger will not bump the
shooter’s trigger finger with sufficient force to fire another
shot. Without this ongoing manual input, a semiautomatic rifle with
a bump stock will not fire multiple shots. Thus, firing multiple
shots requires engaging the trigger one time—and then
some.[7]

															ATF and the dissent counter that machineguns
also require continuous manual input from a shooter: He must both
engage the trigger and keep it pressed down to continue shooting.
In their view, there is no meaningful difference between holding
down the trigger of a traditional machinegun and maintaining
forward pressure on the front grip of a semiautomatic rifle with a
bump stock. This argument ignores that Congress defined a
machinegun by what happens “automatically” “by a single function of
the trigger.” Simply pressing and holding the trigger down on a
fully automatic rifle is not manual input in addition to a
trigger’s function—it is what causes the trigger to function in the
first place. By contrast, pushing forward on the front grip of a
semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock is not part of
functioning the trigger. After all, pushing on the front grip will
not cause the weapon to fire unless the shooter also engages the
trigger with his other hand. Thus, while a fully automatic rifle
fires multiple rounds “automatically . . . by a single
function of the trigger,” a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a
bump stock can achieve the same result only by a single function of
the trigger and then some.

															Moreover, a semiautomatic rifle with a bump
stock is indistinguishable from another weapon that ATF concedes
cannot fire multiple shots “automatically”: the Ithaca Model 37
shotgun. The Model 37 allows the user to “slam fire”—that is, fire
multiple shots by holding down the trigger while operating the
shotgun’s pump action. Each pump ejects the spent cartridge and
loads a new one into the chamber. If the shooter is holding down
the trigger, the new cartridge will fire as soon as it is loaded.
According to ATF, the Model 37 fires more than one shot by a single
function of the trigger, but it does not do so “automatically”
because the shooter must manually operate the pump action with his
nontrigger hand. See 83 Fed. Reg. 66534. That logic mandates the
same result here. Maintaining the proper amount of forward pressure
on the front grip of a bump-stock equipped rifle is no less
additional input than is operating the pump action on the Model
37.[8]

															ATF responds that a shooter is less physically
involved with operating a bump-stock equipped rifle than operating
the Model 37’s pump action. Once the shooter pulls the rifle’s
trigger a single time, the bump stock “harnesses the firearm’s
recoil energy in a continuous back-and-forth cycle that allows the
shooter to attain continuous firing.” Id., at 66519. But,
even if one aspect of a weapon’s operation could be seen as
“automatic,” that would not mean the weapon “shoots . . .
automatically more than one shot . . . by a single
function of the trigger.” §5845(b) (emphasis added). After all,
many weapons have some “automatic” features. For example,
semiautomatic rifles eject the spent cartridge from the firearm’s
chamber and load a new one in its place without any input from the
shooter. See supra, at 10. A semiautomatic rifle is
therefore “automatic” in the general sense that it performs some
operations that would otherwise need to be completed by hand. But,
as all agree, a semiautomatic rifle cannot fire more than one shot
“automatically . . . by a single function of the trigger”
because the shooter must do more than simply engage the trigger one
time. The same is true of a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a
bump stock.

															Thus, even if a semiautomatic rifle could fire
more than one shot by a single function of the trigger, it would
not do so “automatically.”

															C

															Abandoning the text, ATF and the dissent
attempt to shore up their position by relying on the presumption
against ineffectiveness. That presumption weighs against
interpretations of a statute that would “rende[r] the law in a
great measure nugatory, and enable offenders to elude its
provisions in the most easy manner.” The Emily, 9 Wheat.
381, 389 (1824). It is a modest corollary to the commonsense
proposition “that Congress presumably does not enact useless laws.”
United States v. Castleman, 572
U.S. 157, 178 (2014) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment).

															In ATF’s view, Congress “restricted machineguns
because they eliminate the manual movements that a shooter would
otherwise need to make in order to fire continuously” at a high
rate of fire, as bump stocks do. Brief for Petitioners 40. So, ATF
reasons, concluding that bump stocks are lawful “simply because the
[trigger] moves back and forth . . . would exalt artifice
above reality and enable evasion of the federal machinegun ban.”
Id., at 41–42 (internal quotation marks omitted). The
dissent endorses a similar view. See post, at 14–17.

															The presumption against ineffectiveness cannot
do the work that ATF and the dissent ask of it. A law is not
useless merely because it draws a line more narrowly than one of
its conceivable statutory purposes might suggest. Interpreting
§5845(b) to exclude semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks
comes nowhere close to making it useless. Under our reading,
§5845(b) still regulates all traditional machineguns. The fact that
it does not capture other weapons capable of a high rate of fire
plainly does not render the law useless. Moreover, it is difficult
to understand how ATF can plausibly argue otherwise, given that its
consistent position for almost a decade in numerous separate
decisions was that §5845(b) does not capture semiautomatic rifles
equipped with bump stocks. See App. 16–68. Curiously, the dissent
relegates ATF’s about-face to a footnote, instead pointing to its
classification of other devices. See post, at 14–17, and
n. 6.

															The dissent’s additional argument for applying
the presumption against ineffectiveness fails on its own terms. To
argue that our interpretation makes §5845(b) “far less effective,”
the dissent highlights that a shooter with a bump-stock-equipped
rifle can achieve a rate of fire that rivals traditional
machineguns. Post, at 16. But, the dissent elsewhere
acknowledges that a shooter can do the same with an
unmodified semiautomatic rifle using the manual bump-firing
technique. See post, at 5. The dissent thus fails to prove
that our reading makes §5845(b) “far less effective,” much less
ineffective (as is required to invoke the presumption). In any
event, Congress could have linked the definition of “machinegun” to
a weapon’s rate of fire, as the dissent would prefer. But, it
instead enacted a statute that turns on whether a weapon can fire
more than one shot “automatically . . . by a single
function of the trigger.” §5845(b). And, “it is never our job to
rewrite . . . statutory text under the banner of
speculation about what Congress might have done.” Henson v.
Santander Consumer USA Inc., 582 U.S. 79, 89
(2017).[9]

															III

															For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the
judgment of the Court of Appeals.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 Some bump stocks (called
mechanical bump stocks) rely on an internal spring, rather than
forward pressure from the shooter’s nontrigger hand, to force the
rifle and trigger forward after recoil. These devices are not at
issue in this case.
2
 See, e.g.,
Hardin v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives, 65 F. 4th 895 (CA6 2023); Guedes v.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, 45
F. 4th 306 (CADC 2022); Aposhian v. Barr, 958
F.3d 969 (CA10 2020).
3
 These illustrations are
found in the Brief for FPC Action Foundation as Amicus
Curiae 14–15.
4
 Machinegun variants of
the AR–15 style rifle include an additional component known as an
auto sear. The auto sear catches the hammer as it swings backwards,
but will release it again once a new cartridge is loaded if the
trigger is being held back. P. Sweeney, 1 The Gun Digest Book of
the AR–15, p. 38 (2005). An auto sear thus permits a shooter to
fire multiple shots while engaging the trigger only once. ATF has
accordingly recognized that modifying a semiautomatic rifle or
handgun with an auto sear converts it into a machinegun. See ATF
Ruling 81–4.
5
 An animated graphic that
displays the relevant movements is available at
https://www.supremecourt.gov/media/images/AR-15.gif.
6
 The dissent says that we
“resis[t]” the “ordinary understanding of the term ‘function of the
trigger’ with two technical arguments.” Post, at 10. But,
the arguments it refers to explain why, even assuming a
semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock could fire more than
one shot by a single function of the trigger, it could not do so
“automatically.” See infra, at 14–17. Those arguments have
nothing to do with our explanation of what a “single function of
the trigger” means. Ibid.
7
 The dissent seemingly
concedes this point, repeatedly recognizing that the shooter must
both pull the trigger and maintain forward pressure on the
front grip. See, e.g., post, at 6 (“[A] single
pull of the trigger provides continuous fire as long as the shooter
maintains forward pressure on the gun”); ibid. (“A
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle is a machinegun because
. . . a shooter can . . . fire continuous shots
without any human input beyond maintaining forward pressure”);
post, at 10 (“[A] shooter of a bump-stock-equipped AR–15
need only pull the trigger and maintain forward pressure”);
post, at 13 (“After a shooter pulls the trigger, if he
maintains continuous forward pressure on the gun, the bump stock
harnesses the recoil to move the curved lever back and forth
against his finger”).
8
 The dissent attempts to
undermine this analogy by pointing out that a Model 37 requires
manual reloading and therefore cannot qualify as a machinegun under
§5845(b). Post, at 12–13, n. 5. But, that is beside the
point. As ATF itself agrees, the Model 37 is not a machinegun for
another, independent reason: It cannot “automatically” fire more
than one shot by a single function of the trigger. See Brief for
Petitioners 38. And, as explained, the reasons why a Model 37
cannot do so apply with equal force to semiautomatic rifles
equipped with bump stocks.
9
 The dissent concludes by
claiming that our interpretation of §5845(b) “renders Congress’s
clear intent readily evadable.” Post, at 17. And, it
highlights that “[e]very Member of the majority has previously
emphasized that the best way to respect congressional intent is to
adhere to the ordinary understanding of the terms Congress uses.”
Ibid. But, “[w]hen Congress takes the trouble to define the
terms it uses, a court must respect its definitions as virtually
conclusive. . . . This Court will not deviate from an
express statutory definition merely because it varies from the
term’s ordinary meaning.” Department of Agriculture Rural
Development Rural Housing Service v. Kirtz, 601 U.S. 42,
59 (2024) (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted)
(unanimous opinion).


