::decision_cite:: 22-913
::decision_name::  DeVillier v. Texas
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 22–913

															_________________

															RICHARD DeVILLIER, et al., PETITIONERS
v. TEXAS

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[April 16, 2024]

															Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Richard DeVillier alleges that the State of
Texas took his property for stormwater storage. He sought just
compensation under the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment,
arguing that the Constitution itself authorized him to bring suit.
We granted certiorari to decide whether “a person whose property is
taken without compensation [may] seek redress under the
self-executing Takings Clause even if the legislature has not
affirmatively provided them with a cause of action.” Pet. for Cert.
i. That question assumes the property owner has no separate cause
of action under which to bring a claim based on the Takings Clause.
But, that is not the case here. Texas law provides a cause of
action that allows property owners to vindicate their rights under
the Takings Clause. We therefore vacate and remand so that
DeVillier’s claims may proceed under Texas’ state-law cause of
action.

															I

															Richard DeVillier and more than 120 other
petitioners own property north of U. S. Interstate Highway 10
between Houston and Beaumont, Texas.[1] The State of Texas undertook several projects to
facilitate the use of that portion of the highway as a
flood-evacuation route. It installed a roughly 3-foot-tall barrier
along the highway median to act as a dam, preventing stormwater
from covering the south side of the road.

															In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey brought heavy
rainfall to southeast Texas. The new median barrier performed as
intended, keeping the south side of the highway open. But, it also
flooded petitioners’ land to the north, displacing them from their
homes, damaging businesses, ruining crops, killing livestock, and
destroying family heirlooms. The same thing happened during
Tropical Storm Imelda in 2019. As depicted, the median barrier kept
the south side of the highway open (on the left side of both
pictures) by holding back stormwater, which then submerged property
north of the highway (on the right side of both pictures):

															

															Because heavy rainfall is not uncommon in
southeast Texas, the median barrier will continue to cause flooding
on DeVillier’s land during future storms.

															DeVillier filed suit in Texas state court. He
alleged that, by building the median barrier and using his property
to store stormwater, Texas had effected a taking of his property.
DeVillier argued that he was therefore entitled to just
compensation under both the United States and Texas Constitutions.
Other property owners filed similar suits. Texas removed the cases
to federal court, where they were consolidated into a single
proceeding with one operative complaint. The operative complaint
includes inverse- condemnation claims under both the Texas
Constitution and the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. See
Knick v. Township of Scott, 588 U.S. 180, 186 (2019)
(“Inverse condemnation is a cause of action against a governmental
defendant to recover the value of property which has been taken in
fact by the governmental defendant” (internal quotation marks
omitted)).

															As relevant, Texas moved to dismiss the federal
inverse-condemnation claim, arguing that a plaintiff has no cause
of action arising directly under the Takings Clause. It contended
that only Rev. Stat. §1979, 42 U. S. C. §1983, provides a
vehicle to assert constitutional violations, and §1983 does not
authorize claims against a State. DeVillier did not dispute that he
intended to bring his federal claim directly under the Fifth
Amendment. Instead, he responded that the Takings Clause is
“self-executing,” which, he argued, means that the Clause itself
provides a cause of action for just compensation.

															The District Court denied Texas’ motion,
concluding that a property owner may sue a State directly under the
Takings Clause. The Court of Appeals disagreed. In a one- paragraph
opinion, it “h[eld] that the Fifth Amendment Takings Clause as
applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment does not
provide a right of action for takings claims against a state.” 53
F. 4th 904 (CA5 2023) (per curiam).

															We granted certiorari to decide whether a
property owner may sue for just compensation directly under the
Takings Clause. 600 U. S. ___ (2023). We now vacate and remand
for further proceedings.

															II

															The Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment
states: “nor shall private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation.” We have explained that “a property
owner acquires an irrevocable right to just compensation
immediately upon a taking” “[b]ecause of ‘the self-executing
character’ of the Takings Clause ‘with respect to
compensation.’ ” Knick, 588 U. S., at 192 (quoting
First English Evangelical Lutheran Church of Glendale v.
County of Los Angeles, 482 U.S.
304, 315 (1987)). Texas does not dispute the nature of the
substantive right to just compensation. This case presents only a
question regarding the procedural vehicle by which a property owner
may seek to vindicate that right.

															Constitutional rights do not typically come with
a built-in cause of action to allow for private enforcement in
courts. See Egbert v. Boule, 596 U.S. 482, 490–491
(2022). Instead, constitutional rights are generally invoked
defensively in cases arising under other sources of law, or
asserted offensively pursuant to an independent cause of action
designed for that purpose, see, e.g., 42
U. S. C. §1983. DeVillier argues that the Takings Clause
is an exception. He relies on First English Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Glendale v. County of Los Angeles to assert
that the just-compensation requirement of the Takings Clause is
“self-executing” and that “[s]tatutory recognition [is] not
necessary” for takings claims because they “are grounded in the
Constitution itself.” 482 U. S., at 315 (internal quotation
marks omitted). In other words, the Takings Clause creates by its
own force a cause of action authorizing suits for just
compensation.

															The cases that DeVillier cites do not directly
confront whether the Takings Clause provides a cause of action for
just compensation. First English itself proceeded under a
state-law cause of action. Id., at 313–314, n. 8.
DeVillier also points to several takings cases where property
owners sought injunctions to prevent the Government from
interfering with their property rights, such as by obtaining
easements or imposing zoning regulations. See Dohany v.
Rogers, 281 U.S.
362, 364 (1930); Delaware, L. & W. R. Co. v.
Morristown, 276 U.S.
182, 188 (1928); Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty
Co., 272 U.S.
365, 384 (1926); Cuyahoga River Power Co. v.
Akron, 240 U.S.
462, 463 (1916); Norwood v. Baker, 172 U.S.
269, 276 (1898). Because none of those cases relied on §1983
for a cause of action, he reasons that those cases must have
proceeded directly under the Constitution. But, the mere fact that
the Takings Clause provided the substantive rule of decision for
the equitable claims in those cases does not establish that it
creates a cause of action for damages, a remedy that is legal, not
equitable, in nature.[2] That
said, the absence of a case relying on the Takings Clause for a
cause of action does not by itself prove there is no cause of
action. It demonstrates only that constitutional concerns do not
arise when property owners have other ways to seek just
compensation. Our precedents do not cleanly answer the question
whether a plaintiff has a cause of action arising directly under
the Takings Clause.

															But, this case does not require us to resolve
that question. The question presented asks what would happen if a
property owner had no cause of action to vindicate his rights under
the Takings Clause. It would be imprudent to decide that question
without satisfying ourselves of the premise that there is no cause
of action. Our constitutional system assigns to state officers “a
coordinate responsibility to enforce [the Constitution] according
to their regular modes of procedure.” Howlett v.
Rose, 496 U.S.
356, 367 (1990). It therefore looks to “[t]he good faith of the
States [to] provid[e] an important assurance that ‘this
Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made
in Pursuance thereof shall be the supreme Law of the Land.’ ”
Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S.
706, 755 (1999) (quoting U. S. Const., Art. VI;
original alterations omitted). We should not “assume the States
will refuse to honor the Constitution,” including the Takings
Clause, because “States and their officers are [also] bound by
obligations imposed by the Constitution.” 527 U. S., at
755.

															The premise that Texas left DeVillier with no
cause of action to obtain the just compensation guaranteed by the
Takings Clause does not hold. Texas state law provides a cause of
action by which property owners may seek just compensation against
the State. As Texas explained at oral argument, its state-law
inverse-condemnation cause of action provides a vehicle for takings
claims based on both the Texas Constitution and the Takings Clause.
Tr. of Oral Arg. 38; id., at 40 (citing Baytown v.
Schrock, 645 S.W.3d 174 (Tex. 2022)); Tr. of Oral Arg.
59–60. And, although Texas asserted that proceeding under the
state-law cause of action would require an amendment to the
complaint, it also assured the Court that it would not oppose any
attempt by DeVillier and the other petitioners to seek one.
Id., at 41, 61, 64. This case therefore does not present the
circumstance in which a property owner has no cause of action to
seek just compensation. On remand, DeVillier and the other property
owners should be permitted to pursue their claims under the Takings
Clause through the cause of action available under Texas law.

															III

															The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
vacated, and the case is remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 Because this case comes
to us at the pleading stage, we assume the truth of the facts
alleged in the operative complaint. See, e.g.,
Swierkiewicz v. Sorema N. A., 534 U.S.
506, 508, n. 1 (2002).
2
 The significance of
DeVillier’s equitable cases is further obscured by fundamental
changes to the law of equity that postdate those decisions. Compare
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 2 with A. Bellia & B. Clark, The
Original Source of the Cause of Action in Federal Courts, 101 Va.
L. Rev. 609, 653 (2015).


