::decision_cite:: 22O141
::decision_name::  Texas v. New Mexico
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 141, Orig.

															_________________

															TEXAS, PLAINTIFF v. NEW MEXICO AND
COLORADO

															on exception to third interim report of the
special master

															[June 21, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															The Rio Grande River begins in Colorado, flows
through New Mexico into Texas, and then courses along the
Texas-Mexico border. The Rio Grande Compact (Compact)—an interstate
agreement between Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas—governs the
“equitable apportionment” of the waters of the Rio Grande among
those three States. To ensure that Texas receives its share of
water, the Compact relies on the United States Bureau of
Reclamation to operate the Rio Grande Project, an irrigation system
in southern New Mexico.

															In 2013, Texas filed suit against the other two
signatory States, alleging that, in violation of the Compact,
excessive groundwater pumping in New Mexico was depleting supplies
of Rio Grande water bound for Texas. The United States sought to
intervene, and in a decision we issued six Terms ago, we allowed it
to do so. See Texas v. New Mexico, 583 U.S. 407
(2018). In our opinion, we explained that the Federal Government
has its own distinct interests in holding New Mexico to its
obligations under the Compact, as the Compact is “inextricably
intertwined” with the United States’ operation of the Rio Grande
Project. Id., at 413.

															Now, Texas and New Mexico have agreed to a
proposed consent decree that would resolve this case and codify a
methodology for determining each State’s allocation of the Rio
Grande’s waters. But the United States opposes the proposed consent
decree, contending that it would dispose of the Federal
Government’s claims that New Mexican groundwater pumping is
violating the Compact.

															We agree with the United States. “[P]arties who
choose to resolve litigation through settlement may not dispose of
the claims of a third party.” Firefighters v.
Cleveland, 478
U.S. 501, 529 (1986). The United States still advances the same
claims as it did in 2018, backed by the same unique federal
interests we identified then. Through the consent decree, the
States would settle all parties’ Compact claims and, in the
process, cut off the United States’ requested relief as to New
Mexican groundwater pumping. Because our precedent does not permit
that result, the States’ motion to enter the consent decree is
denied.

															I

															A

															The Rio Grande springs from the San Juan
Mountains just east of the Continental Divide in southwestern
Colorado. After tumbling out of the Rocky Mountains, the river cuts
south through the deserts of New Mexico before crossing into Texas
near the city of El Paso. From there, the river snakes its way
southeast, marking the border between the United States and Mexico
and eventually spilling into the Gulf of Mexico at the city of
Brownsville, Texas.

															Of course, when a river touches so many
jurisdictions, disputes about water rights are bound to follow. The
Rio Grande is no exception. In the late 19th century, Mexico began
to voice concerns about water shortages caused by increased use of
the Rio Grande’s upstream waters in the United States. See National
Resources Committee, Regional Planning: Part VI—The Rio Grande
Joint Investigation in the Upper Rio Grande Basin in Colorado, New
Mexico, and Texas, 1936–1937, pp. 7–8 (1938). In 1906, the United
States and Mexico settled that dispute and entered into a treaty,
with the United States promising to provide Mexico 60,000 acre-feet
of Rio Grande water each year. See Convention Between the United
States and Mexico Providing for the Equitable Distribution of the
Waters of the Rio Grande for Irrigation Purposes, May 21, 1906, 34
Stat. 2953, T. S. No. 455. To deliver on that promise, the
United States needed to harness the river’s irregular ebb and flow
brought on by alternating dry spells and floods. Accordingly, the
Federal Government resolved to construct a new dam and reservoir at
Elephant Butte in New Mexico, about 100 miles north of the
Texas-New Mexico border. Among the first irrigation projects
authorized by the Reclamation Act of 1902, the dam and reservoir
constituted an essential component of the new Rio Grande Project,
an irrigation system implemented by the United States Bureau of
Reclamation (Reclamation). See Act of Feb. 25, 1905, ch. 798, 33
Stat. 814.

															Thanks to the Rio Grande Project, the United
States had harnessed the Rio Grande’s water. But that raised
another question: What to do with it? Enter the “Downstream
Contracts,” a series of agreements between the United States and
two irrigation districts in New Mexico and Texas. First signed in
1906 and later renegotiated in the 1930s, the Downstream Contracts
provided that, after allocating Mexico’s share of Rio Grande water
under the 1906 Treaty, the United States would deliver
apportionments of water to the two political subdivisions—the
Elephant Butte Irrigation District in New Mexico (EBID) and El Paso
County Water Improvement District No. 1 in Texas (EP1).
Specifically, Reclamation agreed to supply water to 88,000
irrigable acres in EBID and 67,000 irrigable acres in EP1,
amounting to shares of about 57% and 43% of the reserved water,
respectively. Letter from S. Somach to Special Master, p. 36
(May 8, 2018).

															That left the competing water-rights claims of
Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas. To resolve that dispute, those
States looked to the U. S. Constitution’s Compact Clause,
which permits States to enter into agreements among themselves,
with the consent of Congress. Art. I, §10, cl. 3. While
contractual in nature, an interstate compact “ ‘is not just a
contract,’ but also ‘a federal statute enacted by Congress’ that
preempts contrary state law.” New York v. New Jersey,
598 U.S. 218, 224 (2023) (quoting Alabama v. North
Carolina, 560 U.S. 330, 351 (2010)). Once Congress gives its
stamp of approval, an interstate compact becomes the law of the
land, much like any other federal statute.

															In 1938, with Congress’s endorsement, Colorado,
New Mexico, and Texas agreed to the Rio Grande Compact, which
“effect[ed] an equitable apportionment” of the Rio Grande’s waters
among the three States. Act of May 31, 1939, 53 Stat. 785. For the
upstream States, the Compact imposed certain delivery obligations.
It required Colorado to deliver a particular amount of water to the
New Mexican border. Id., at 787–788. “But then, instead of
similarly requiring New Mexico to deliver a specified amount of
water annually to the Texas state line, the Compact directed New
Mexico to deliver water to the [Elephant Butte] Reservoir.”
Texas, 583 U. S., at 410–411. That “choice made all the
sense in the world in light of the simultaneously negotiated
Downstream Contracts that promised Texas water districts a certain
amount of water every year from the Reservoir’s resources.”
Id., at 411. In other words, the Compact relied on
Reclamation to apportion water through its contractual obligations
to EBID and EP1.

															Although the Rio Grande’s waters were plentiful
in the 1930s, drought conditions set in beginning in the late 1940s
and early 1950s. As a result, entities in southern New Mexico below
the Elephant Butte Reservoir began pumping groundwater at
increasing levels to support local agriculture. That groundwater
pumping had important hydrological implications for the Rio Grande
Project.

															Here’s why: When Reclamation releases water from
Elephant Butte, the water flows into the bed of the Rio Grande, and
then to a series of canals and ditches, eventually reaching
irrigated farms, its final destination. Some of the water runs off
of the fields or percolates into the ground, returning to the river
through drains or seepage. Due to these “return flows,” water
trickles back to the Rio Grande riverbed, where it proceeds farther
downstream to other irrigation destinations. But groundwater
pumping in southern New Mexico interrupts that process, both by
drawing water away from the river and by intercepting the return
flows that would otherwise replenish it. Put simply, the more
groundwater pumping between the Elephant Butte Reservoir and Texas,
the more water Reclamation has to release from the reservoir to
comply with its delivery obligations.

															Reclamation dealt with these changing
circumstances by developing an equation known as the D2 Curve.
Using Project data from 1951 to 1978—the so-called D2 Period that
witnessed New Mexico’s ramped-up groundwater pumping—Reclamation
devised a linear regression model to help it predict how much water
would be available to EBID and EP1 based on a given release of
water from the Elephant Butte Reservoir.

															The extent of groundwater pumping in New Mexico
nonetheless remained a point of contention, and in 2013, Texas
filed an original action in this Court against New Mexico.[1] Among other things, Texas alleged
that New Mexico was violating the Compact by permitting local
entities to pump groundwater at levels exceeding those contemplated
in 1938, intercepting water bound for the Lone Star State. Texas
requested declaratory, injunctive, and monetary relief, including
an injunction commanding New Mexico to cease all interference with
the United States’ operation of the Rio Grande Project.

															The United States sought to intervene in Texas’s
suit and filed its own complaint in 2014. Like Texas, the Federal
Government took issue with New Mexico’s groundwater pumping,
explaining that excessive water interception below Elephant Butte
could reduce Project efficiency “to a point where 43% of the
available water could not be delivered to [EP1], and 60,000
acre-feet per year could not be delivered to Mexico.” Intervening
Complaint 4, ¶15. For relief, the United States sought a
declaration and an injunction requiring New Mexico to stop in-state
entities from interfering with the Project’s delivery of water to
EBID, EP1, and Mexico. Id., at 5.

															The Special Master appointed to adjudicate this
case recommended dismissing the United States’ complaint. But this
Court allowed the United States to intervene. Specifically, we held
that “the federal government has an interest in seeing that water
is deposited in the [Elephant Butte] Reservoir consistent with the
Compact’s terms,” as that “is what allows the United States to meet
its duties under the Downstream Contracts, which are themselves
essential to the fulfillment of the Compact’s expressly stated
purpose.” Texas, 583 U. S., at 414.

															B

															The litigation continued. After the Special
Master denied summary judgment and held the first phase of trial,
Texas and New Mexico negotiated a proposed consent decree. The
consent decree would make “[c]ompliance with th[e] Decree”
sufficient to show “compliance with the Compact with respect to the
division of Rio Grande water below Elephant Butte Reservoir.” Third
Interim Report of the Special Master Addendum 8, ¶7 (Third Interim
Report Addendum).

															The centerpiece of the proposed consent decree
would be the establishment of the Effective El Paso Index (EEPI), a
new method of determining the allotment of Rio Grande water New
Mexico must deliver downstream into Texas. The EEPI’s calculations
of water allocations would be based on conditions during the D2
Period, when New Mexico was actively depleting return flows through
groundwater pumping. That is, the EEPI would permit levels of
pumping “reflected in the 1951–1978 timeframe rather than
[requiring] a strict return to a pumping condition as existed in
1938.” Third Interim Report 75. The EEPI would then rely on the El
Paso Gage, a flow indicator near the New Mexico-Texas border, to
measure New Mexico’s delivery of water into Texas. Finally, the
consent decree would require Reclamation to transfer water between
EBID and EP1 as needed to maintain a specified allotment.

															The States moved the Special Master to approve
the proposed consent decree, but the United States objected. As
relevant here, the United States maintained that the consent decree
would impermissibly dispose of its Compact claims without its
consent. The Special Master disagreed, however, and issued a Third
Interim Report recommending that this Court approve the consent
decree. The United States filed an exception to the report, and we
set the case for argument.

															II

															A consent decree “embodies an agreement of the
parties and thus in some respects is contractual in nature.”
Rufo v. Inmates of Suffolk County Jail, 502 U.S.
367, 378 (1992). But it is also “an agreement that the parties
desire and expect will be reflected in, and be enforceable as, a
judicial decree.” Ibid.

															In Firefighters v. Cleveland,
478
U.S. 501, we described the rules that apply when parties wish
to settle via consent decree over the objection of a nonconsenting
intervenor. “[W]hile an intervenor is entitled to present evidence
and have its objections heard . . . on whether to approve
a consent decree,” it generally cannot block a decree that would
settle the other parties’ claims “merely by withholding its
consent.” Id., at 529.

															That rule does not apply, however, when the
parties’ settlement would also affect the intervenor’s claims.
Under those circumstances, parties “who choose to resolve
litigation through settlement may not dispose of the claims of a
third party . . . without that party’s agreement.”
Ibid. In other words, a “court’s approval of a consent
decree between some of the parties . . . cannot dispose
of the valid claims of nonconsenting intervenors; if properly
raised, these claims remain and may be litigated by the
intervenor.” Ibid.

															Consequently, and as we explained 20 years
before Firefighters, “where the Government seeks an item of
relief to which evidence adduced at trial may show that it is
entitled, the [court] may not enter a ‘consent’ judgment without
the actual consent of the Government.” United States v.
Ward Baking Co., 376 U.S.
327, 334 (1964).

															III

															With these legal rules in mind, we must now
decide whether to approve the States’ proposed consent decree over
the Federal Government’s objection. The relevant questions under
our precedents are whether the United States has valid Compact
claims and whether the proposed consent decree would dispose of
those claims. Because the answer to each of those questions is yes,
the consent decree cannot be approved without the United States’
consent.

															A

															1

															Conventional wisdom posits that, because time
changes all things, no one can step into the same river twice. This
case may be an exception, though, for the same considerations that
convinced us to let the United States intervene six Terms ago also
lead us to conclude that the United States still has valid Compact
claims today.

															In 2014, the United States asked to intervene in
this action, asserting “essentially the same claims Texas already”
pleaded. Texas, 583 U. S., at 409. Namely, the United
States alleged that New Mexico was impermissibly “siphon[ing] off
water below the Reservoir in ways the Downstream Contracts do not
anticipate.” Id., at 411. The Special Master recommended
that we dismiss the United States’ complaint, reasoning “that the
Compact does not confer on the United States the power to enforce
its terms.” Ibid. But in its exception to that report, the
United States maintained that “it may pursue claims for violations
of the Compact itself.” Id., at 412.

															We agreed with the United States. Although
interstate compacts are (as the name suggests) agreements between
States, “we have sometimes permitted the federal government to
participate in compact suits to defend ‘distinctively federal
interests’ that a normal litigant might not be permitted to pursue
in traditional litigation.” Id., at 412–413 (quoting
Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U.S.
725, 745, n. 21 (1981)). Examining the nature of the
United States’ claims and the Rio Grande Project’s unique
relationship to the Compact, we ticked through “several
considerations” persuading us that the United States “may pursue
the particular claims it has pleaded in this case.” 583 U. S.,
at 413.

															First, “the Compact is inextricably intertwined
with the Rio Grande Project and the Downstream Contracts,” both
carried out by the Federal Government. Ibid. The purpose of
the Compact, recall, was to “ ‘effec[t] an equitable
apportionment’ ” of the Rio Grande’s waters among the
signatory States. Ibid. (alteration in original). But it
“can achieve that purpose only because, by the time the Compact was
executed and enacted, the United States had negotiated and approved
the Downstream Contracts, in which it assumed a legal
responsibility to deliver a certain amount of water to Texas.”
Ibid. The United States, therefore, “might be said to serve,
through the Downstream Contracts, as a sort of ‘agent’ of the
Compact,” responsible for ensuring Texas and New Mexico receive
their apportionments. Ibid. (some internal quotation marks
omitted). Or, put another way, “the Compact could be thought
implicitly to incorporate the Downstream Contracts by reference.”
Ibid. “However described,” the bottom line was that the
“federal government has an interest in seeing that water is
deposited in the Reservoir consistent with the Compact’s terms.”
Id., at 414. And although running parallel with Texas’s
asserted interests, the United States’ interest was “distinctively
federal.” Id., at 413 (internal quotation marks omitted). If
New Mexico interfered with the Project, for instance, Reclamation
might prove unable “to meet its duties under the Downstream
Contracts, which are themselves essential to the fulfillment of the
Compact’s expressly stated purpose.” Id., at 414 (emphasis
added).

															Second, along similar lines, we stressed that
New Mexico had “conceded that the United States plays an integral
role in the Compact’s operation” and so had its own interests in
this litigation. Ibid. Specifically, New Mexico had argued
that the Federal Government was “an indispensable party” because it
was “ ‘responsible for . . . delivery of
. . . water’ as required by the Downstream Contracts and
anticipated by the Compact.” Ibid. (quoting New Mexico’s
Brief in Opposition to Texas’ Motion for Leave to File Complaint 33
(Mar. 11, 2013) (2013 BIO); alterations in Texas).
For that reason, the “ ‘entry of a Decree in accordance with
Texas’ Prayer for Relief would necessarily affect the United
States’ interests.’ ” 583 U. S., at 414 (quoting 2013 BIO
33; emphasis added).

															Third, we also took note of the Federal
Government’s obligations under the 1906 Treaty. As explained above,
the United States must deliver 60,000 acre-feet of water from the
Elephant Butte Reservoir to Mexico, but the United States can “fill
that Reservoir” only if New Mexico complies with its obligation “to
deliver a specified amount of water to the facility.” 583
U. S., at 414. Thus, the United States’ ability to deliver
water to Mexico depends on New Mexico’s compliance with “its
Compact obligations,” and “a breach of the Compact could jeopardize
the federal government’s ability to satisfy its treaty
obligations.” Ibid. “Permitting the United States to
proceed” with its own Compact claims would “allow it to ensure that
those obligations are, in fact, honored.” Id., at
415.[2]

															In light of these “ ‘distinctively federal
interests,’ ” we held that the United States could validly
claim that New Mexico was “effectively breaching its Compact duty
to deliver water to the Reservoir.” Id., at 411, 413. Our
2018 decision leads inexorably to the same conclusion today: The
United States has its own, uniquely federal claims under the
Compact. If it did not, one might wonder why we permitted the
Federal Government to intervene in the first place.

															2

															Our 2018 decision is also all but dispositive
of the States’ arguments that the United States lacks valid Compact
claims today.

															For starters, the States contend that the United
States has no valid Compact claims because it does not itself
receive an apportionment of water under the Compact. Joint Reply to
Exception of the United States by the State of Texas et al.
29–31 (Joint Reply). But the United States did not receive an
apportionment of Rio Grande water in 2018 any more than it does
now. Rather, as we explained, its claims arise from the Compact’s
incorporation of the Downstream Contracts and the attendant risk
that New Mexico’s interference with the Project could leave
Reclamation unable to meet its contractual and treaty
obligations.

															The States and the dissent also assert that the
United States failed to allege a “1938 baseline”—a shorthand for
the claim that New Mexico’s groundwater pumping should be
restricted to levels in effect when the Compact was enacted. See
Joint Reply 36–37; post, at 18–24, and nn. 2–3 (opinion
of Gorsuch, J.). But that argument, too, is foreclosed by our prior
decision. There, we explained that Texas had alleged New Mexico was
“breaching its Compact duty” by allowing downstream water “users to
siphon off water . . . in ways the Downstream Contracts
do not anticipate.” Texas, 583 U. S., at 411; see
Texas’s Complaint 10, ¶18 (alleging that current pumping “changed
the conditions that existed in 1938”). And we recognized that the
United States asserted “essentially the same claims Texas already
has.” Texas, 583 U. S., at 409; see id., at 411
(United States’ claims “parallel Texas’s”); id., at 415
(United States seeks “substantially the same relief ” as
Texas). Whether the United States’ complaint uses the term “1938
baseline” is beside the point. Both Texas and the United States
pleaded that New Mexico was violating the Compact by pumping more
groundwater than the Compact contemplates, and that is still the
claim that the United States wishes to pursue now.[3]

															Last, we are not persuaded by the States’
reliance on our decisions in Hinderlider v. La Plata
River & Cherry Creek Ditch Co., 304 U.S.
92 (1938), and California v. United States,
438 U.S.
645 (1978). The States maintain that they alone represent
EBID’s and EP1’s interests in an allocation of Compact water;
accordingly, they say, any interest Reclamation has in fulfilling
the Downstream Contracts is strictly derivative of the States’
interest in how the water is apportioned. Joint Reply 31–36; see
post, at 14, 18. For support, they rely on
Hinderlider, which held that a Colorado ditch company had no
right to water that the State of Colorado had agreed to apportion
to New Mexico under the La Plata River Compact. 304 U. S., at
106–108. “[T]he States,” we explained, “had power to bind by
compact their respective appropriators,” id., at 108,
notwithstanding the ditch company’s pre-existing right under
Colorado law to a certain apportionment of water, id., at
98.

															The States’ argument here fails for at least two
reasons. First, our decision in 2018 is incompatible with the
suggestion that the Federal Government’s interest is either
entirely derivative of the States’ interests (as with the
relationship between the Colorado ditch company and the State of
Colorado in Hinderlider) or merely a stand-in for the
interests of the water districts. See post, at 20. Our
reasons for finding that intervention was warranted—(1) the United
States’ duties under the Project and the Downstream Contracts, (2)
the United States’ integral role in the Compact’s operation, and
(3) the United States’ treaty obligations—stemmed from
“ ‘distinctively federal interests’ ” the United
States has, independent of Texas, “in seeing that water is
deposited in the Reservoir consistent with the Compact’s terms.”
Texas, 583 U. S., at 413–414 (emphasis added). As it
did then, the United States continues to claim that New Mexico’s
interference with the Project’s delivery of water violates the
Compact. That Texas’s litigation strategy has since changed, such
that it is now willing to accept a greater degree of groundwater
pumping, does not erase the United States’ independent stake in
pursuing claims against New Mexico.

															Second, because Hinderlider was based on
a compact that is different from the one at issue here, its
reasoning is inapposite. Different compacts divide state and
federal authority differently. Hinderlider’s analysis of the
States’ “conclusive” power to determine their citizens’ shares of
water was a function of the specifics of the compact in that case,
which gave the States the sole authority over and responsibility
for apportionments of the La Plata River. 304 U. S., at 96–98,
107. Here, by contrast, the United States “plays an integral role
in the Compact’s operation.” Texas, 583 U. S., at 414.
Reclamation’s operation of the Project, and the United States’
obligations to EBID and EP1 under the Downstream Contracts, are the
means by which the States chose to effectuate the apportionment of
water in the Compact. Rather than “requiring New Mexico to deliver
a specified amount of water annually to the Texas state line,” the
Compact instead “directed New Mexico to deliver water to the”
Elephant Butte Reservoir. Id., at 410–411. That choice made
sense only because the “Downstream Contracts . . .
promised Texas water districts a certain amount of water” via the
operation of the Project. Id., at 411. Accordingly, the
Federal Government has its own “interest in seeing that water is
deposited in the Reservoir consistent with the Compact’s terms” and
not “siphon[ed] off . . . in ways the Downstream
Contracts do not anticipate.” Id., at 411, 414.

															For similar reasons, our continued recognition
of the United States’ valid Compact claims would not, as the States
assert, “tur[n] on its head the hierarchy of authorities governing
the distribution of water within a federal irrigation project.”
Joint Reply 34. Relying on California v. United
States, 438 U.S.
645, the States maintain that the Federal Government must
“comply with state water laws in operating its federal Reclamation
projects.” Joint Reply 34. True, so far as it goes.
California held that §8 of the Reclamation Act required the
United States to comply with state-imposed permit requirements when
impounding water from the Stanislaus River for use in a federal
irrigation project. 438 U. S., at 647–650. But the United
States is not seeking to skirt any state law here.

															Again, the United States’ position is that the
Compact itself imposes a duty of noninterference on New Mexico.
That claim is not at odds with California’s holding that the
Secretary of the Interior must “comply with state laws, not
inconsistent with congressional directives, governing use of water
employed in federal reclamation projects.” California v.
FERC, 495 U.S.
490, 504 (1990) (discussing California v. United
States, 438 U. S. 645). The United States’ claims rest on
its interpretation of the Compact, and the Compact trumps state
water law. See Texas, 583 U. S., at 412 (“[O]nce
Congress gives its consent, a compact between States—like any other
federal statute—becomes the law of the land”); New York, 598
U. S., at 224.[4]

															B

															1

															Because the United States has valid Compact
claims and has not agreed to the proposed consent decree, the only
remaining question is whether the consent decree would dispose of
those claims. Firefighters, 478 U. S., at 529. We
conclude it would.

															To start, the States have conceded as much. In
their briefing before the Special Master, the States acknowledged
that the consent decree would “resolv[e] all of the Compact claims
stated by any party.” States’ Joint Motion To Enter
Consent Decree 33 (Nov. 14, 2022) (emphasis added). Likewise, in
their reply, the States reaffirmed that “upon entry of the Consent
Decree, the United States will have no remaining Compact
claims.” States’ Joint Reply in Support of Joint Motion To
Enter Consent Decree 7 (Feb. 3, 2023) (emphasis added). The Special
Master agreed, explaining that the consent decree would “resolv[e]
the dispute over the Texas and downstream New Mexico
apportionments.” Third Interim Report 2.

															And those concessions state an obvious
proposition, because the consent decree would in fact resolve the
United States’ claims in this action. The United States maintains
that New Mexico’s pumping breaches that State’s alleged duty under
the Compact not to interfere with the Project. Intervening
Complaint 4–5. And the United States seeks an injunction against
New Mexico that would prohibit that interference. Id., at 5.
The proposed consent decree, however, would dispose of that legal
claim and the associated prayer for relief without addressing the
United States’ contentions, as it neither imposes the duty of
noninterference that the United States seeks nor enjoins New Mexico
from allowing groundwater pumping beyond 1938 levels. To the
contrary, the consent decree would incorporate New Mexico’s
groundwater pumping into the Compact by adopting a new method for
apportioning Rio Grande water—the EEPI.

															As explained above, the EEPI would establish “an
index-based methodology” to assess New Mexico’s compliance with its
water delivery obligations “based upon Project operations during
the D2 Period,” from 1951 to 1978. Third Interim Report Addendum 9,
23, 25. Those decades coincided with the onset of drought
conditions in the Rio Grande Basin and an accompanying increase in
groundwater pumping in New Mexico. Measuring New Mexico’s
compliance with the consent decree (and, by extension, its
compliance with the Compact) against D2 Period conditions would
therefore take for granted the very increase in groundwater pumping
that the United States maintains violates New Mexico’s duty of
noninterference. See Third Interim Report 75 (“Undisputedly, the
Consent Decree’s reliance on the D2 period seeks to limit pumping
to an average amount as reflected in the 1951–1978 timeframe rather
than a strict return to a pumping condition as existed in
1938”).

															Were the consent decree adopted, the United
States would be precluded from claiming what it argues now—that New
Mexico’s present degree of groundwater pumping violates the
Compact. Indeed, the consent decree would settle that question by
deeming New Mexico compliant with the Compact, even as it allows
pumping at the D2 levels. And that legal determination would “be
reflected in, and be enforceable as, a judicial decree.”
Rufo, 502 U. S., at 378.

															The proposed consent decree, therefore, would
have the effect of “cutting [the United States] off from a remedy
to which” it alleges it is entitled. Lawyer v. Department
of Justice, 521 U.S.
567, 579 (1997).

															The United States’ argument that groundwater
pumping at D2 levels violates the Compact may or may not ultimately
prevail at trial. But we “may not enter a ‘consent’ judgment
without the actual consent of the Government” when “the Government
seeks an item of relief to which evidence adduced at trial may show
that it is entitled.” Ward Baking Co., 376 U. S., at
334. Because the consent decree here would have that effect, we
cannot approve it over the United States’ objection.

															2

															The States and the dissent nevertheless argue
that rejecting the consent decree would unjustly expand the scope
of this original action and that the United States can and should
litigate its claims in another forum instead. Joint Reply 38–45;
post, at 14–21. Neither argument holds up.

															The first objection boils down to the
unremarkable fact that the United States’ and Texas’s interests
have now diverged. As we explained in 2018, both Texas and the
United States at that point asserted “essentially the same claims”
and sought “substantially the same relief ”—an end to New
Mexico “siphon[ing] off water below the Reservoir in ways the
Downstream Contracts do not anticipate.” Texas, 583
U. S., at 409, 411, 415. The United States still asserts that
same claim today and seeks that same relief. That Texas has chosen
to compromise does not mean that, by staying the course, the United
States is expanding this action. What is more, this Court was well
aware in 2018 that the States’ interests might diverge from those
of the United States. See, e.g., New Mexico’s Reply
to Exceptions of the United States and Colorado 25 (July 28, 2017);
Reply Brief for United States 18 (July 28, 2017).

															The second objection turns on a
mischaracterization of the United States’ claims. The States
maintain that the Federal Government’s qualms with New Mexico’s
groundwater pumping pose only “an intrastate dispute between
the United States and New Mexico” that is better left to existing
litigation in other courts. Joint Reply 43–45. For the reasons
already explained, however, the United States’ claims are not
limited to “issues related to reclamation law, Project operations,
or the details of New Mexico water administration.” Id., at
43. Rather, the United States maintains that New Mexico’s
groundwater pumping contravenes the Compact itself. Nothing in the
consent decree prohibits that alleged breach of the Compact; to the
contrary, compliance with the consent decree would instead
constitute compliance with the Compact. We therefore do not see how
the United States could elsewhere vindicate its claim that the
Compact itself bars New Mexico’s allegedly excessive groundwater
pumping.[5]

															*  *  *

															Our decision today follows directly from our
prior recognition of the United States’ distinct federal interests
in the Rio Grande Compact. Having acknowledged those interests, and
having allowed the United States to intervene to assert them, we
cannot now allow Texas and New Mexico to leave the United States up
the river without a paddle. Because the consent decree would
dispose of the United States’ Compact claims without its consent,
the United States’ exception is sustained, and the States’ motion
to enter the consent decree is denied.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 Texas’s complaint also
names Colorado as a signatory to the Compact, but because this
dispute concerns the allocation of water downstream from Colorado,
the only claims at issue here are against New Mexico. Texas’s
Complaint 2, ¶¶4–5.
2
 Alongside these
justifications for the United States’ intervention, we also noted
that the Federal Government sought “substantially the same
relief ” as Texas, without that State’s objection.
Texas, 583 U. S., at 415. Citing this portion of our
2018 opinion, the dissent repeatedly asserts that, back then, we
reserved the question whether the United States could bring Compact
claims of its own. See post, at 5–6, 20–22 (opinion of
Gorsuch, J.). To the contrary, we repeatedly stated that the
United States could “pursue the Compact claims it has pleaded in
this original action.” Texas, 583 U. S., at 415;
accord, id., at 409, 413. And that is exactly what we
permitted the United States to do. After all, the effect of our
decision was to allow the United States to file its complaint.
Id., at 412–413. The issues we reserved were much narrower,
namely, “whether the United States could initiate
litigation” to enforce the Compact (had a suit not already been
pending between the States) and whether the United States could
“expand the scope of an existing” lawsuit. Id., at
415 (emphasis added); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 13–14 (Jan. 8,
2018). As with our 2018 decision, today’s opinion says nothing
about whether the United States could have initiated a Compact suit
on its own, and, as explained below, nothing about our decision
here expands the scope of this litigation either. See infra,
at 18.
3
 At times, the dissent
suggests that the United States’ past briefing in this Court
eschewed a 1938 baseline. See post, at 5, 18, n. 2, 21,
n. 3, 23. It did not. The United States merely observed that a
ruling in New Mexico’s favor—that New Mexico does not
violate the Compact by allowing excessive groundwater pumping—would
likely affect how Reclamation operated the Rio Grande Project,
including by undermining a 2008 agreement that calculated water
allocations using a D2 Period baseline. Memorandum in Support of
Motion of United States to Intervene as Plaintiff 6 (Feb. 27,
2014); accord, U. S. Brief in Opposition 19 (June 16, 2014).
Nowhere in that briefing did the United States purport to take any
definitive position on what groundwater-pumping baseline the
Compact should ultimately be read to require. See Reply Brief for
United States 20 (July 28, 2017) (“[I]t remains to be seen whether
the interests of Texas and the United States are completely
aligned” regarding the correct baseline).
4
 Accordingly, and
notwithstanding the dissent’s suggestions to the contrary, see
post, at 2, 19–20, 24–25, nothing in today’s decision
affects either this Court’s state water law jurisprudence or the
Federal Government’s general obligation to comply with state water
law.
5
 The dissent suggests
that, even if we were to adopt the proposed consent decree, the
United States could continue to litigate the meaning of the Compact
in another forum and later seek modification of the decree.
Post, at 14–19. Perhaps the United States could argue
elsewhere that some source of law aside from the Compact
independently bars current levels of New Mexican groundwater
pumping. But what matters here is that the consent decree would
settle that question as far as the Compact is concerned. It would
thus eliminate the United States’ claim that New Mexico is
breaching a duty under the Compact. Indeed, at oral argument,
counsel for Texas conceded that the consent decree would be
“binding on the United States” with respect to “the baseline
against which the Compact is judged.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 41 (Mar. 20,
2024). That position makes sense. And it is difficult to understand
why the States would care so much about this Court’s approval of
the consent decree if the United States could turn right around and
undo it tomorrow in another court. Moreover, the dissent’s reliance
on Firefighters v. Cleveland, 478
U.S. 501 (1986), for this contention is mistaken. See
post, at 15–16. The reason the labor union in
Firefighters “remained free to bring its own independent
. . . claims in separate litigation” was that the consent
decree there did “not purport to resolve any claims the [u]nion
might have,” as the union had “failed to raise any substantive
claims” in the first place. 478 U. S., at 530. As already
explained, the same cannot be said here.


