::decision_cite:: 23-175
::decision_name::  City of Grants Pass v. Johnson
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–175

															_________________

															CITY OF GRANTS PASS, OREGON, PETITIONER
v. Gloria Johnson, et al., on behalf of themselves and
all others similarly situated

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, dissenting.

															Sleep is a biological necessity, not a crime.
For some people, sleeping outside is their only option. The City of
Grants Pass jails and fines those people for sleeping anywhere in
public at any time, including in their cars, if they use as little
as a blanket to keep warm or a rolled-up shirt as a pillow. For
people with no access to shelter, that punishes them for being
homeless. That is unconscionable and unconstitutional. Punishing
people for their status is “cruel and unusual” under the Eighth
Amendment. See Robinson v. California, 370 U.S.
660 (1962).

															Homelessness is a reality for too many
Americans. On any given night, over half a million people across
the country lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime
residence. Many do not have access to shelters and are left to
sleep in cars, sidewalks, parks, and other public places. They
experience homelessness due to complex and interconnected issues,
including crippling debt and stagnant wages; domestic and sexual
abuse; physical and psychiatric disabilities; and rising housing
costs coupled with declining affordable housing options.

															At the same time, States and cities face immense
challenges in responding to homelessness. To address these
challenges and provide for public health and safety, local
governments need wide latitude, including to regulate when, where,
and how homeless people sleep in public. The decision below did, in
fact, leave cities free to punish “littering, public urination or
defecation, obstruction of roadways, possession or distribution of
illicit substances, harassment, or violence.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 200a. The only question for the Court today is whether the
Constitution permits punishing homeless people with no access to
shelter for sleeping in public with as little as a blanket to keep
warm.

															It is possible to acknowledge and balance the
issues facing local governments, the humanity and dignity of
homeless people, and our constitutional principles. Instead, the
majority focuses almost exclusively on the needs of local
governments and leaves the most vulnerable in our society with an
impossible choice: Either stay awake or be arrested. The
Constitution provides a baseline of rights for all Americans rich
and poor, housed and unhoused. This Court must safeguard those
rights even when, and perhaps especially when, doing so is
uncomfortable or unpopular. Otherwise, “the words of the
Constitution become little more than good advice.” Trop v.
Dulles, 356 U.S.
86, 104 (1958) (plurality opinion).

															I

															The causes, consequences, and experiences of
homelessness are complex and interconnected. The majority paints a
picture of “cities across the American West” in “crisis” that are
using criminalization as a last resort. Ante, at 1. That
narrative then animates the majority’s reasoning. This account,
however, fails to engage seriously with the precipitating causes of
homelessness, the damaging effects of criminalization, and the
myriad legitimate reasons people may lack or decline shelter.

															A

															Over 600,000 people experience homelessness in
America on any given night, meaning that they lack “a fixed,
regular, and adequate nighttime residence.” Dept. of Housing and
Urban Development, T. de Sousa et al., The 2023 Annual
Homeless Assessment Report to Congress 4 (2023 AHAR). These people
experience homelessness in different ways. Although 6 in 10 are
able to secure shelter beds, the remaining 4 in 10 are unsheltered,
sleeping “in places not meant for human habitation,” such as
sidewalks, abandoned buildings, bus or train stations, camping
grounds, and parked vehicles. See id., at 2. “Some sleep
alone in public places, without any physical structures (like tents
or shacks) or connection to services. Others stay in encampments,
which generally refer to groups of people living semipermanently in
tents or other temporary structures in a public space.” Brief for
California as Amicus Curiae 6 (California Brief ) (citation
omitted). This is in part because there has been a national
“shortage of 188,000 shelter beds for individual adults.” Brief for
Service Providers as Amici Curiae 8 (Service Providers Brief
).

															People become homeless for many reasons,
including some beyond their control. “[S]tagnant wages and the lack
of affordable housing” can mean some people are one unexpected
medical bill away from being unable to pay rent. Brief for Public
Health Professionals and Organizations as Amici Curiae 3.
Every “$100 increase in median rental price” is “associated with
about a 9 percent increase in the estimated homelessness rate.”
GAO, A. Cackley, Homelessness: Better HUD Oversight of Data
Collection Could Improve Estimates of Homeless Populations 30
(GAO–20–433, 2020). Individuals with disabilities, immigrants, and
veterans face policies that increase housing instability. See
California Brief 7. Natural disasters also play a role, including
in Oregon, where increasing numbers of people “have lost housing
because of climate events such as extreme wildfires across the
state, floods in the coastal areas, [and] heavy snowstorms.” 2023
AHAR 52. Further, “mental and physical health challenges,” and
family and domestic “violence and abuse” can be precipitating
causes of homelessness. California Brief 7.

															People experiencing homelessness are young and
old, live in families and as individuals, and belong to all races,
cultures, and creeds. Given the complex web of causes, it is
unsurprising that the burdens of homelessness fall
disproportionately on the most vulnerable in our society. People
already in precarious positions with mental and physical health,
trauma, or abuse may have nowhere else to go if forced to leave
their homes. Veterans, victims of domestic violence, teenagers, and
people with disabilities are all at an increased risk of
homelessness. For veterans, “those with a history of mental health
conditions, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
. . . are at greater risk of homelessness.” Brief for
American Psychiatric Association et al. as Amici Curiae
6. For women, almost 60% of those experiencing homelessness report
that fleeing domestic violence was the “immediate cause.” Brief for
Advocates for Survivors of Gender-Based Violence as Amici
Curiae 9. For young people, “family dysfunction and rejection,
sexual abuse, juvenile legal system involvement, ‘aging out’ of the
foster care system, and economic hardship” make them particularly
vulnerable to homelessness. Brief for Juvenile Law Center
et al. as Amici Curiae 2. For American Indians,
“policies of removal and resettlement in tribal lands” have caused
displacement, resulting in “a disproportionately high rate of
housing insecurity and unsheltered homelessness.” Brief for
StrongHearts Native Helpline et al. as Amici Curiae 10,
24. For people with disabilities, “[l]ess than 5% of housing in the
United States is accessible for moderate mobility disabilities, and
less than 1% is accessible for wheelchair use.” Brief for
Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund et al. as
Amici Curiae 2 (Disability Rights Brief ).

															B

															States and cities responding to the
homelessness crisis face the difficult task of addressing the
underlying causes of homelessness while also providing for public
health and safety. This includes, for example, dealing with the
hazards posed by encampments, such as “a heightened risk of disease
associated with living outside without bathrooms or wash basins,”
“deadly fires” from efforts to “prepare food and create heat
sources,” violent crime, and drug distribution and abuse.
California Brief 12.

															Local governments need flexibility in responding
to homelessness with effective and thoughtful solutions. See
infra, at 19–21. Almost all of these policy solutions are
beyond the scope of this case. The only question here is whether
the Constitution permits criminalizing sleeping outside when there
is nowhere else to go. That question is increasingly relevant
because many local governments have made criminalization a
frontline response to homelessness. “[L]ocal measures to
criminalize ‘acts of living’ ” by “prohibit[ing] sleeping,
eating, sitting, or panhandling in public spaces” have recently
proliferated. U. S. Interagency Council on Homelessness,
Searching Out Solutions 1 (2012).

															Criminalizing homelessness can cause a
destabilizing cascade of harm. “Rather than helping people to
regain housing, obtain employment, or access needed treatment and
services, criminalization creates a costly revolving door that
circulates individuals experiencing homelessness from the street to
the criminal justice system and back.” Id., at 6. When a
homeless person is arrested or separated from their property, for
example, “items frequently destroyed include personal documents
needed for accessing jobs, housing, and services such as IDs,
driver’s licenses, financial documents, birth certificates, and
benefits cards; items required for work such as clothing and
uniforms, bicycles, tools, and computers; and irreplaceable
mementos.” Brief for 57 Social Scientists as Amici Curiae
17–18 (Social Scientists Brief ). Consider Erin Spencer, a
disabled Marine Corps veteran who stores items he uses to make a
living, such as tools and bike parts, in a cart. He was arrested
repeatedly for illegal lodging. Each time, his cart and belongings
were gone once he returned to the sidewalk. “[T]he massive number
of times the City or State has taken all I possess leaves me in a
vacuous déjà vu.” Brief for National Coalition for Homeless
Veterans et al. as Amici Curiae 28.

															Incarceration and warrants from unpaid fines can
also result in the loss of employment, benefits, and housing
options. See Social Scientists Brief 13, 17 (incarceration and
warrants can lead to “termination of federal health benefits such
as Social Security, Medicare, or Medicaid,” the “loss of a shelter
bed,” or disqualification from “public housing and Section 8
vouchers”). Finally, criminalization can lead homeless people to
“avoid calling the police in the face of abuse or theft for fear of
eviction from public space.” Id., at 27. Consider the tragic
story of a homeless woman “who was raped almost immediately
following a police move-along order that pushed her into an
unfamiliar area in the dead of night.” Id., at 26. She
described her hesitation in calling for help: “What’s the point? If
I called them, they would have made all of us move [again].”
Ibid.

															For people with nowhere else to go, fines and
jail time do not deter behavior, reduce homelessness, or increase
public safety. In one study, 91% of homeless people who were
surveyed “reported remaining outdoors, most often just moving two
to three blocks away” when they received a move-along order.
Id., at 23. Police officers in these cities recognize as
much: “ ‘Look we’re not really solving anybody’s problem. This
is a big game of whack-a-mole.’ ” Id., at 24. Consider
Jerry Lee, a Grants Pass resident who sleeps in a van. Over the
course of three days, he was woken up and cited six times for
“camping in the city limits” just because he was sleeping in the
van. App. 99 (capitalization omitted). Lee left the van each time
only to return later to sleep. Police reports eventually noted that
he “continues to disregard the city ordinance and returns to the
van to sleep as soon as police leave the area. Dayshift needs to
check on the van this morning and . . . follow up for
tow.” Ibid. (same).

															Shelter beds that are available in theory may be
practically unavailable because of “restrictions based on gender,
age, income, sexuality, religious practice, curfews that conflict
with employment obligations, and time limits on stays.” Social
Scientists Brief 22. Studies have shown, however, that the “vast
majority of those who are unsheltered would move inside if safe and
affordable options were available.” Service Providers Brief 8
(collecting studies). Consider CarrieLynn Hill. She cannot stay at
Gospel Rescue Mission, the only entity in Grants Pass offering
temporary beds, because “she would have to check her nebulizer in
as medical equipment and, though she must use it at least once
every four hours, would not be able to use it in her room.”
Disability Rights Brief 18. Similarly, Debra Blake’s “disabilities
prevent her from working, which means she cannot comply with the
Gospel Rescue Mission’s requirement that its residents work 40-hour
work weeks.” Ibid.

															Before I move on, consider one last example of a
Nashville man who experienced homelessness for nearly 20 years.
When an outreach worker tried to help him secure housing, the
worker had difficulty finding him for his appointments because he
was frequently arrested for being homeless. He was arrested 198
times and had over 250 charged citations, all for petty offenses.
The outreach worker made him a t-shirt that read “Please do not
arrest me, my outreach worker is working on my housing.” Service
Providers Brief 16. Once the worker was able to secure him stable
housing, he “had no further encounters with the police, no
citations, and no arrests.” Ibid.

															These and countless other stories reflect the
reality of criminalizing sleeping outside when people have no other
choice.

															II

															Grants Pass, a city of 38,000 people in
southern Oregon, adopted three ordinances (Ordinances) that
effectively make it unlawful to sleep anywhere in public, including
in your car, at any time, with as little as a blanket or a
rolled-up shirt as a pillow. The Ordinances prohibit “[c]amping” on
“any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right of way, park,
bench, or any other publicly-owned property or under any bridge or
viaduct.” Grants Pass, Ore. Municipal Code §5.61.030 (2024). A
“[c]ampsite” is defined as “any place where bedding, sleeping bag,
or other material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire
is placed, established, or maintained for the purposes of
maintaining a temporary place to live.” §5.61.010(B). Relevant
here, the definition of “campsite” includes sleeping in “any
vehicle.” Ibid. The Ordinances also prohibit camping in
public parks, including the “[o]vernight parking” of any vehicle.
§6.46.090(B).[1]

															The City enforces these Ordinances with fines
starting at $295 and increasing to $537.60 if unpaid. Once a person
is cited twice for violating park regulations within a 1-year
period, city officers can issue an exclusion order barring that
person from the park for 30 days. See §6.46.350. A person who camps
in a park after receiving that order commits criminal trespass,
which is punishable by a maximum of 30 days in jail and a $1,250
fine. Ore. Rev. Stat. §164.245 (2023); see §§161.615(3),
161.635(1)(c).

															In 2019, the Ninth Circuit held that “ ‘the
Eighth Amendment prohibits the imposition of criminal penalties for
sitting, sleeping, or lying outside on public property for homeless
individuals who cannot obtain shelter.’ ” Martin v.
Boise, 920 F.3d 584, 616, cert. denied, 589 U. S. ___
(2019). Considering an ordinance from Boise, Idaho, that made it a
misdemeanor to use “streets, sidewalks, parks, or public places”
for “camping,” 920 F. 3d, at 603, the court concluded that “as
long as there is no option of sleeping indoors, the government
cannot criminalize indigent, homeless people for sleeping outdoors,
on public property,” id., at 617.

															Respondents here, two longtime residents of
Grants Pass who are homeless and sleep in their cars, sued on
behalf of themselves and all other involuntarily homeless people in
the City, seeking to enjoin enforcement of the Ordinances. The
District Court eventually certified a class and granted summary
judgment to respondents. “As was the case in Martin, Grants
Pass has far more homeless people than ‘practically available’
shelter beds.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 179a. The City had “zero
emergency shelter beds,” and even counting the beds at the Gospel
Rescue Mission (GRM), which is “the only entity in Grants Pass that
offers any sort of temporary program for some class members,”
“GRM’s 138 beds would not be nearly enough to accommodate the at
least 602 homeless individuals in Grants Pass.” Id., at
179a–180a. Thus, “the only way for homeless people to legally sleep
on public property within the City is if they lay on the ground
with only the clothing on their backs and without their items near
them.” Id., at 178a.

															The District Court entered a narrow injunction.
It concluded that Grants Pass could “implement time and place
restrictions for when homeless individuals may use their belongings
to keep warm and dry and when they must have their belonging[s]
packed up.” Id., at 199a. The City could also “ban the use
of tents in public parks,” as long as it did not “ban people from
using any bedding type materials to keep warm and dry while they
sleep.” Id., at 199a–200a. Further, Grants Pass could
continue to “enforce laws that actually further public health and
safety, such as laws restricting littering, public urination or
defecation, obstruction of roadways, possession or distribution of
illicit substances, harassment, or violence.” Id., at
200a.

															The Ninth Circuit largely agreed that the
Ordinances violated the Eighth Amendment because they punished
people who lacked “some place, such as [a] shelter, they can
lawfully sleep.” 72 F. 4th 868, 894 (2023). It further narrowed the
District Court’s already-limited injunction. The Ninth Circuit
noted that, beyond prohibiting bedding, “the ordinances also
prohibit the use of stoves or fires, as well as the erection of any
structures.” Id., at 895. Because the record did not
“establis[h that] the fire, stove, and structure prohibitions
deprive homeless persons of sleep or ‘the most rudimentary
precautions’ against the elements,” the court remanded for the
District Court “to craft a narrower injunction recognizing
Plaintiffs’ limited right to protection against the elements, as
well as limitations when a shelter bed is available.”
Ibid.

															III

															The Eighth Amendment prohibits the infliction
of “cruel and unusual punishments.” Amdt. 8 (Punishments Clause).
This prohibition, which is not limited to medieval tortures, places
“ ‘limitations’ on ‘the power of those entrusted with the
criminal-law function of government.’ ” Timbs v.
Indiana, 586 U.S. 146, 151 (2019). The Punishments Clause
“circumscribes the criminal process in three ways: First, it limits
the kinds of punishment that can be imposed on those convicted of
crimes; second, it proscribes punishment grossly disproportionate
to the severity of the crime; and third, it imposes substantive
limits on what can be made criminal and punished as such.”
Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S.
651, 667 (1977) (citations omitted).

															In Robinson v. California, this
Court detailed one substantive limitation on criminal punishment.
Lawrence Robinson was convicted under a California statute for
“ ‘be[ing] addicted to the use of narcotics’ ” and faced
a mandatory 90-day jail sentence. 370 U. S., at 660. The
California statute did not “punis[h] a person for the use of
narcotics, for their purchase, sale or possession, or for
antisocial or disorderly behavior resulting from their
administration.” Id., at 666. Instead, it made “the ‘status’
of narcotic addiction a criminal offense, for which the offender
may be prosecuted ‘at any time before he reforms.’ ”
Ibid.

															The Court held that, because it criminalized the
“ ‘status’ of narcotic addiction,” ibid., the
California law “inflict[ed] a cruel and unusual punishment in
violation” of the Punishments Clause, id., at 667.
Importantly, the Court did not limit that holding to the status of
narcotic addiction alone. It began by reasoning that the
criminalization of the “mentally ill, or a leper, or [those]
afflicted with a venereal disease” “would doubtless be universally
thought to be an infliction of cruel and unusual punishment.”
Id., at 666. It extended that same reasoning to the status
of being an addict, because “narcotic addiction is an illness”
“which may be contracted innocently or involuntarily.” Id.,
at 667.

															Unlike the majority, see ante, at 15–17,
the Robinson Court did not rely on the harshness of the
criminal penalty itself. It understood that “imprisonment for
ninety days is not, in the abstract, a punishment which is either
cruel or unusual.” 370 U. S., at 667. Instead, it reasoned
that, when imposed because of a person’s status, “[e]ven one day in
prison would be a cruel and unusual punishment.” Ibid.

															Robinson did not prevent States from
using a variety of tools, including criminal law, to address
harmful conduct related to a particular status. The Court candidly
recognized the “vicious evils of the narcotics traffic” and
acknowledged the “countless fronts on which those evils may be
legitimately attacked.” Id., at 667–668. It left untouched
the “broad power of a State to regulate the narcotic drugs traffic
within its borders,” including the power to “impose criminal
sanctions . . . against the unauthorized manufacture,
prescription, sale, purchase, or possession of narcotics,” and the
power to establish “a program of compulsory treatment for those
addicted to narcotics.” Id., at 664–665.

															This Court has repeatedly cited Robinson
for the proposition that the “ Eighth Amendment . . .
imposes a substantive limit on what can be made criminal and
punished as such.” Rhodes v. Chapman, 452 U.S.
337, 346, n. 12 (1981); see also Gregg v.
Georgia, 428 U.S.
153, 172 (1976) (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens,
JJ.) (“The substantive limits imposed by the Eighth Amendment on
what can be made criminal and punished were discussed in
Robinson”). Though it casts aspersions on Robinson
and mistakenly treats it as an outlier, the majority does not
overrule or reconsider that decision.[2] Nor does the majority cast doubt on this Court’s firmly
rooted principle that inflicting “unnecessary suffering” that is
“grossly disproportionate to the severity of the crime” or that
serves no “penological purpose” violates the Punishments Clause.
Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S.
97, 103, and n. 7 (1976). Instead, the majority sees this case
as requiring an application or extension of Robinson. The
majority’s understanding of Robinson, however, is plainly
wrong.

															IV

															Grants Pass’s Ordinances criminalize being
homeless. The status of being homeless (lacking available shelter)
is defined by the very behavior singled out for punishment
(sleeping outside). The majority protests that the Ordinances “do
not criminalize mere status.” Ante, at 21. Saying so does
not make it so. Every shred of evidence points the other way. The
Ordinances’ purpose, text, and enforcement confirm that they target
status, not conduct. For someone with no available shelter, the
only way to comply with the Ordinances is to leave Grants Pass
altogether.

															A

															Start with their purpose. The Ordinances, as
enforced, are intended to criminalize being homeless. The Grants
Pass City Council held a public meeting in 2013 to “ ‘identify
solutions to current vagrancy problems.’ ” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 168a. The council discussed the City’s previous efforts to
banish homeless people by “buying the person a bus ticket to a
specific destination,” or transporting them to a different
jurisdiction and “leaving them there.” App. 113–114. That was
unsuccessful, so the council discussed other ideas, including a
“ ‘do not serve’ ” list or “a ‘most unwanted list’ made
by taking pictures of the offenders . . . and then
disseminating it to all the service agencies.” Id., at 121.
The council even contemplated denying basic services such as “food,
clothing, bedding, hygiene, and those types of things.”
Ibid.

															The idea was deterrence, not altruism. “[U]ntil
the pain of staying the same outweighs the pain of changing, people
will not change; and some people need an external source to
motivate that needed change.” Id., at 119. One councilmember
opined that “[m]aybe they aren’t hungry enough or cold enough
. . . to make a change in their behavior.” Id., at
122. The council president summed up the goal succinctly:
“ ‘[T]he point is to make it uncomfortable enough for
[homeless people] in our city so they will want to move on down the
road.’ ” Id., at 114.[3]

															One action item from this meeting was the
“ ‘targeted enforcement of illegal camping’ ” against
homeless people. App. to Pet. for Cert. 169a. “The year following
the [public meeting] saw a significant increase in enforcement of
the City’s anti-sleeping and anti-camping ordinances. From 2013
through 2018, the City issued a steady stream of tickets under the
ordinances.” 72 F. 4th, at 876–877.

															B

															Next consider the text. The Ordinances by
their terms single out homeless people. They define “campsite” as
“any place where bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for
bedding purposes” is placed “for the purpose of maintaining a
temporary place to live.” §5.61.010. The majority claims that it
“makes no difference whether the charged defendant is homeless.”
Ante, at 20. Yet the Ordinances do not apply unless bedding
is placed to maintain a temporary place to live. Thus, “what
separates prohibited conduct from permissible conduct is a person’s
intent to ‘live’ in public spaces. Infants napping in strollers,
Sunday afternoon picnickers, and nighttime stargazers may all
engage in the same conduct of bringing blankets to public spaces
[and sleeping], but they are exempt from punishment because they
have a separate ‘place to live’ to which they presumably intend to
return.” Brief for Criminal Law and Punishment Scholars as Amici
Curiae 12.

															Put another way, the Ordinances single out for
punishment the activities that define the status of being homeless.
By most definitions, homeless individuals are those that lack “a
fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence.” 42
U. S. C. §11434a(2)(A); 24 CFR §§582.5, 578.3 (2023).
Permitting Grants Pass to criminalize sleeping outside with as
little as a blanket permits Grants Pass to criminalize
homelessness. “There is no . . . separation between being
without available indoor shelter and sleeping in public—they are
opposite sides of the same coin.” Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 25. The Ordinances use the definition of
“campsite” as a proxy for homelessness because those lacking “a
fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence” are those who
need to sleep in public to “maintai[n] a temporary place to
live.”

															Take the respondents here, two longtime homeless
residents of Grants Pass who sleep in their cars. The Ordinances
define “campsite” to include “any vehicle.” §5.61.010(B). For
respondents, the Ordinances as applied do not criminalize any
behavior or conduct related to encampments (such as fires or
tents). Instead, the Ordinances target respondents’ status as
people without any other form of shelter. Under the majority’s
logic, cities cannot criminalize the status of being homeless, but
they can criminalize the conduct that defines that status. The
Constitution cannot be evaded by such formalistic distinctions.

															The Ordinances’ definition of “campsite” creates
a situation where homeless people necessarily break the law just by
existing. “[U]nsheltered people have no private place to survive,
so they are virtually guaranteed to violate these pervasive laws.”
S. Rankin, Hiding Homelessness: The Transcarceration of
Homelessness, 109 Cal. L. Rev. 559, 561 (2021); see also
Disability Rights Brief 2 (“[T]he members of Grants Pass’s homeless
community do not choose to be homeless. Instead, in a city with no
public shelters, they have no alternative but to sleep in parks or
on the street”). Every human needs to sleep at some point. Even if
homeless people with no available shelter options can exist for a
few days in Grants Pass without sleeping, they eventually must
leave or be criminally punished.

															The majority resists this understanding, arguing
that the Ordinances criminalize the conduct of being homeless in
Grants Pass while sleeping with as little as a blanket. Therefore,
the argument goes, “[r]ather than criminalize mere status, Grants
Pass forbids actions.” Ante, at 20. With no discussion about
what it means to criminalize “status” or “conduct,” the majority’s
analysis consists of a few sentences repeating its conclusion again
and again in hopes that it will become true. See ante, at
20–21 (proclaiming that the Ordinances “forbi[d] actions” “[r]ather
than criminalize mere status”; and that they “do not criminalize
mere status”). The best the majority can muster is the following
tautology: The Ordinances criminalize conduct, not pure status,
because they apply to conduct, not status.

															The flaw in this conclusion is evident. The
majority countenances the criminalization of status as long as the
City tacks on an essential bodily function—blinking, sleeping,
eating, or breathing. That is just another way to ban the person.
By this logic, the majority would conclude that the ordinance
deemed unconstitutional in Robinson criminalizing “being an
addict” would be constitutional if it criminalized “being an addict
and breathing.” Or take the example in Robinson: “Even one
day in prison would be a cruel and unusual punishment for the
‘crime’ of having a common cold.” 370 U. S., at 667. According
to the majority, although it is cruel and unusual to punish someone
for having a common cold, it is not cruel and unusual to punish
them for sniffling or coughing because of that cold. See
Manning v. Caldwell, 930 F.3d 264, 290 (CA4 2019)
(Wilkinson, J., dissenting) (“In the rare case where the Eighth
Amendment was found to invalidate a criminal law, the law in
question sought to punish persons merely for their need to eat or
sleep, which are essential bodily functions. This is simply a
variation of Robinson’s command that the state identify
conduct in crafting its laws, rather than punish a person’s mere
existence” (citation omitted)).

															C

															The Ordinances are enforced exactly as
intended: to criminalize the status of being homeless. City
officials sought to use the Ordinances to drive homeless people out
of town. See supra, at 13–14. The message to homeless
residents is clear. As Debra Blake, a named plaintiff who passed
away while this case was pending, see n. 1, supra,
shared:

															“I have been repeatedly told by Grants Pass
police that I must ‘move along’ and that there is nowhere in Grants
Pass that I can legally sit or rest. I have been repeatedly
awakened by Grants Pass police while sleeping and told that I need
to get up and move. I have been told by Grants Pass police that I
should leave town.

															Because I have no choice but to live outside and
have no place else to go, I have gotten tickets, fines and have
been criminally prosecuted for being homeless.” App. 180–181.

															Debra Blake’s heartbreaking message captures the
cruelty of criminalizing someone for their status: “I am afraid at
all times in Grants Pass that I could be arrested, ticketed and
prosecuted for sleeping outside or for covering myself with a
blanket to stay warm.” Id., at 182. So, at times, when she
could, Blake “slept outside of the city.” Ibid. Blake, who
was disabled, unemployed, and elderly, “owe[d] the City of Grants
Pass more than $5000 in fines for crimes and violations related
directly to [her] involuntary homelessness and the fact that there
is no affordable housing or emergency shelters in Grants Pass where
[she could] stay.” Ibid.

															Another homeless individual was found outside a
nonprofit “in severe distress outside in the frigid air.”
Id., at 109. “[H]e could not breathe and he was experiencing
acute pain,” and he “disclosed fear that he would be arrested and
trespassed again for being outside.” Ibid. Another,
CarrieLynn Hill, whose story you read earlier, see supra, at
7, was ticketed for “lying down on a friend’s mat” and “lying down
under a tarp to stay warm.” App. 134. She was “constantly afraid”
of being “cited and arrested for being outside in Grants Pass.”
Ibid. She is unable to stay at the only shelter in the City
because she cannot keep her nebulizer, which she needs throughout
the night, in her room. So she does “not know of anywhere in the
city of Grants Pass where [she] can safely sleep or rest without
being arrested, trespassed, or moved along.” Id., at 135. As
she put it: “The only way I have figured out how to get by is try
to stay out of sight and out of mind.” Ibid. Stories like
these fill the record and confirm the City’s success in targeting
the status of being homeless.

															The majority proclaims, with no citation, that
“it makes no difference whether the charged defendant is homeless,
a backpacker on vacation passing through town, or a student who
abandons his dorm room to camp out in protest.” Ante, at 20.
That describes a fantasy. In reality, the deputy chief of police
operations acknowledged that he was not aware of “any non-homeless
person ever getting a ticket for illegal camping in Grants Pass.”
Tr. of Jim Hamilton in Blake v. Grants Pass, No.
1:18–cr–01823 (D Ore., Oct. 16, 2019), ECF Doc. 63–4, p. 16.
Officers testified that “laying on a blanket enjoying the park”
would not violate the ordinances, ECF Doc. 63–7, at 2; and that
bringing a sleeping bag to “look at stars” would not be punished,
ECF Doc. 63–5, at 5. Instead, someone violates the Ordinance only
if he or she does not “have another home to go to.” Id., at
6. That is the definition of being homeless. The majority does not
contest any of this. So much for the Ordinances applying to
backpackers and students.

															V

															Robinson should squarely resolve this
case. Indeed, the majority seems to agree that an ordinance that
fined and jailed “homeless” people would be unconstitutional. See
ante, at 21 (disclaiming that the Ordinances “criminalize
mere status”). The majority resists a straightforward application
of Robinson by speculating about policy considerations and
fixating on extensions of the Ninth Circuit’s narrow rule in
Martin.

															The majority is wrong on all accounts. First, no
one contests the power of local governments to address
homelessness. Second, the majority overstates the line-drawing
problems that this case presents. Third, a straightforward
application of Robinson does not conflict with Powell
v. Texas, 392 U.S.
514 (1968). Finally, the majority draws the wrong message from
the various amici requesting this Court’s guidance.

															A

															No one contests that local governments can
regulate the time, place, and manner of public sleeping pursuant to
their power to “enact regulations in the interest of the public
safety, health, welfare or convenience.” Schneider v.
State (Town of Irvington), 308 U.S.
147, 160 (1939). This power includes controlling “the use of
public streets and sidewalks, over which a municipality must
rightfully exercise a great deal of control in the interest of
traffic regulation and public safety.” Shuttlesworth v.
Birmingham, 394 U.S.
147, 152 (1969). When exercising that power, however,
regulations still “may not abridge the individual liberties secured
by the Constitution.” Schneider, 308 U. S., at 160.

															The Ninth Circuit in Martin provided that
“an ordinance violates the Eighth Amendment insofar as it imposes
criminal sanctions against homeless individuals for sleeping
outdoors, on public property, when no alternative shelter is
available to them.” 920 F. 3d, at 604. Martin was
narrow.[4] Consider these
qualifications:

															“[O]ur holding does not cover individuals
who do have access to adequate temporary shelter, whether
because they have the means to pay for it or because it is
realistically available to them for free, but who choose not to use
it. Nor do we suggest that a jurisdiction with insufficient shelter
can never criminalize the act of sleeping outside. Even
where shelter is unavailable, an ordinance prohibiting sitting,
lying, or sleeping outside at particular times or in particular
locations might well be constitutionally permissible. So, too,
might an ordinance barring the obstruction of public rights of way
or the erection of certain structures.” Id., at 617,
n. 8 (citation omitted).

															Upholding Martin does not call into
question all the other tools that a city has to deal with
homelessness. “Some cities have established approved encampments on
public property with security, services, and other resources;
others have sought to impose geographic and time-limited bans on
public sleeping; and others have worked to clear and clean
particularly dangerous encampments after providing notice and
reminders to those who lived there.” California Brief 14. Others
might “limit the use of fires, whether for cooking or other
purposes” or “ban (or enforce already-existing bans on) particular
conduct that negatively affects other people, including harassment
of passersby, illegal drug use, and littering.” Brief for Maryland
et al. as Amici Curiae 12. All of these tools remain
available to localities seeking to address homelessness within
constitutional bounds.

															B

															The scope of this dispute is narrow.
Respondents do not challenge the City’s “restrictions on the use of
tents or other camping gear,” “encampment clearances,” “time and
place restrictions on sleeping outside,” or “the imposition of
fines or jail time on homeless people who decline accessible
shelter options.” Brief for Respondents 18.

															That means the majority does not need to answer
most of the hypotheticals it poses. The City’s hypotheticals,
echoed throughout the majority opinion, concern “violent crime,
drug overdoses, disease, fires, and hazardous waste.” Brief for
Petitioner 47. For the most part, these concerns are not implicated
in this case. The District Court’s injunction, for example, permits
the City to prohibit “littering, public urination or defecation,
obstruction of roadways, possession or distribution of illicit
substances, harassment, or violence.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 200a.
The majority’s framing of the problem as one involving drugs,
diseases, and fires instead of one involving people trying to keep
warm outside with a blanket just provides the Court with cover to
permit the criminalization of homeless people.

															The majority also overstates the line-drawing
problems that a baseline Eighth Amendment standard presents.
Consider the “unavoidable” “difficult questions” that
discombobulate the majority. Ante, at 32–33. Courts answer
such factual questions every day. For example, the majority asks:
“What does it mean to be ‘involuntarily’ homeless with ‘no place to
go’?” Ibid. Martin’s answer was clear: It is when
“ ‘there is a greater number of homeless individuals in [a
city] than the number of available beds [in shelters,]’ ” not
including “individuals who do have access to adequate
temporary shelter, whether because they have the means to pay for
it or because it is realistically available to them for free.” 920
F. 3d, at 617, and n. 8. The District Court here found
that Grants Pass had “zero emergency shelter beds” and that Gospel
Rescue Mission’s “138 beds would not be nearly enough to
accommodate the at least 602 homeless individuals in Grants Pass.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 179a–180a. The majority also asks: “[W]hat
are people entitled to do and use in public spaces to ‘keep
warm’ ”? Ante, at 33. The District Court’s opinion also
provided a clear answer: They are permitted “bedding type materials
to keep warm and dry,” but cities can still “implement time and
place restrictions for when homeless individuals . . .
must have their belonging[s] packed up.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
199a. Ultimately, these are not metaphysical questions but factual
ones. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C. §11302
(defining “homeless,” “homeless individual,” and “homeless
person”); 24 CFR §582.5 (defining “[a]n individual or family who
lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence”).

															Just because the majority can list difficult
questions that require answers, see ante, at 33, n. 8,
does not absolve federal judges of the responsibility to interpret
and enforce the substantive bounds of the Constitution. The
majority proclaims that this dissent “blinks the difficult
questions.” Ante, at 32. The majority should open its eyes
to available answers instead of throwing up its hands in
defeat.

															C

															The majority next spars with a strawman in its
discussion of Powell v. Texas. The Court in
Powell considered the distinction between status and conduct
but could not agree on a controlling rationale. Four Justices
concluded that Robinson covered any “condition [the
defendant] is powerless to change,” 392 U. S., at 567 (Fortas,
J., dissenting), and four Justices rejected that view. Justice
White, casting the decisive fifth vote, left the question open
because the defendant had “made no showing that he was unable to
stay off the streets on the night in question.” Id., at 554
(opinion concurring in judgment). So, in his view, it was
“unnecessary to pursue at this point the further definition of the
circumstances or the state of intoxication which might bar
conviction of a chronic alcoholic for being drunk in a public
place.” Id., at 553.

															This case similarly called for a straightforward
application of Robinson. The majority finds it telling that
this dissent “barely mentions” Justice Marshall’s opinion in
Powell. Ante, at 32.[5] The majority completely misses the point. Even Justice
Marshall’s plurality opinion in Powell agreed that
Robinson prohibited enforcing laws criminalizing “a mere
status.” 392 U. S., at 532. The Powell Court considered
a statute that criminalized voluntary conduct (getting drunk) that
could be rendered involuntary by a status (alcoholism); here, the
Ordinances criminalize conduct (sleeping outside) that defines a
particular status (homelessness). So unlike the debate in
Powell, this case does not turn on whether the criminalized
actions are “ ‘involuntary’ or ‘occasioned by’ ” a
particular status. Id., at 533 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
For all the reasons discussed above, see supra, at 13–19,
these Ordinances criminalize status and are thus unconstitutional
under any of the opinions in Powell.

															D

															The majority does not let the reader forget
that “a large number of States, cities, and counties” all “urg[ed]
the Court to grant review.” Ante, at 14; see also
ante, at 9 (“An exceptionally large number of cities and
States have filed briefs in this Court”); ante, at 34
(noting the “multitude of amicus briefs before us”);
ante, at 14, n. 3 (listing certiorari-stage amici).
No one contests that States, cities, and counties could benefit
from this Court’s guidance. Yet the majority relies on these
amici to shift the goalposts and focus on policy questions
beyond the scope of this case. It first declares that “[t]he only
question we face is whether one specific provision of the
Constitution . . . prohibits the enforcement of
public-camping laws.” Ante, at 31. Yet it quickly shifts
gears and claims that “the question this case presents is whether
the Eighth Amendment grants federal judges primary responsibility
for assessing those causes [of homelessness] and devising those
responses.” Ante, at 34. This sleight of hand allows the
majority to abdicate its responsibility to answer the first (legal)
question by declining to answer the second (policy) one.

															The majority cites various amicus briefs
to amplify Grants Pass’s belief that its homelessness crisis is
intractable absent the ability to criminalize homelessness. In so
doing, the majority chooses to see only what it wants. Many of
those stakeholders support the narrow rule in Martin. See,
e.g., Brief for City and County of San Francisco
et al. as Amici Curiae 4 (“[U]nder the Eighth Amendment
. . . a local municipality may not prohibit sleeping—a
biological necessity—in all public spaces at all times and under
all conditions, if there is no alternative space available in the
jurisdiction for unhoused people to sleep”); Brief for City of Los
Angeles as Amicus Curiae 1 (“The City agrees with the broad
premise underlying the Martin and Johnson decisions:
when a person has no other place to sleep, sleeping at night in a
public space should not be a crime leading to an arrest, criminal
conviction, or jail”); California Brief 2–3 (“[T]he Constitution
does not allow the government to punish people for the status of
being homeless. Nor should it allow the government to effectively
punish the status of being homeless by making it a crime in all
events for someone with no other options to sleep outside on public
property at night”).

															Even the Federal Government, which restricts
some sleeping activities on park lands, see ante, at 7, has
for nearly three decades “taken the position that laws prohibiting
sleeping in public at all times and in all places violate the
Robinson principle as applied to individuals who have no
access to shelter.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae
14. The same is true of States across the Nation. See Brief for
Maryland et al. as Amici Curiae 3–4 (“Taking these
policies [criminalizing homelessness] off the table does not
interfere with our ability to address homelessness (including the
effects of homelessness on surrounding communities) using other
policy tools, nor does it amount to an undue intrusion on state
sovereignty”).

															Nothing in today’s decision prevents these
States, cities, and counties from declining to criminalize people
for sleeping in public when they have no available shelter. Indeed,
although the majority describes Martin as adopting an
unworkable rule, the elected representatives in Oregon codified
that very rule. See infra, at 26. The majority does these
localities a disservice by ascribing to them a demand for
unfettered freedom to punish that many do not seek.

															VI

															The Court wrongly concludes that the Eighth
Amendment permits Ordinances that effectively criminalize being
homeless. Grants Pass’s Ordinances may still raise a host of other
legal issues. Perhaps recognizing the untenable position it adopts,
the majority stresses that “many substantive legal protections and
provisions of the Constitution may have important roles to play
when States and cities seek to enforce their laws against the
homeless.” Ante, at 31. That is true. Although I do not
prejudge the merits of these other issues, I detail some here so
that people experiencing homelessness and their advocates do not
take the Court’s decision today as closing the door on such
claims.[6]

															A

															The Court today does not decide whether the
Ordinances are valid under a new Oregon law that codifies
Martin. In 2021, Oregon passed a law that constrains the
ability of municipalities to punish homeless residents for public
sleeping. “Any city or county law that regulates the acts of
sitting, lying, sleeping or keeping warm and dry outdoors on public
property that is open to the public must be objectively reasonable
as to time, place and manner with regards to persons experiencing
homelessness.” Ore. Rev. Stat. §195.530(2). The law also grants
persons “experiencing homelessness” a cause of action to “bring
suit for injunctive or declaratory relief to challenge the
objective reasonableness” of an ordinance. §195.530(4). This law
was meant to “ ‘ensure that individuals experiencing
homelessness are protected from fines or arrest for sleeping or
camping on public property when there are no other options.’ ”
Brief in Opposition 35 (quoting Speaker T. Kotek, Hearing on H. B.
3115 before the House Committee on the Judiciary, 2021 Reg. Sess.
(Ore., Mar. 9, 2021)). The panel below already concluded that
“[t]he city ordinances addressed in Grants Pass will be
superseded, to some extent,” by this new law. 72 F. 4th, at 924,
n. 7. Courts may need to determine whether and how the new law
limits the City’s enforcement of its Ordinances.

															B

															The Court today also does not decide whether
the Ordinances violate the Eighth Amendment’s Excessive Fines
Clause. That Clause separately “limits the government’s power to
extract payments, whether in cash or in kind, as punishment for
some offense.” United States v. Bajakajian, 524 U.S.
321, 328 (1998) (internal quotation marks omitted). “The
touchstone of the constitutional inquiry under the Excessive Fines
Clause is the principle of proportionality: The amount of the
forfeiture must bear some relationship to the gravity of the
offense that it is designed to punish.” Id., at 334.

															The District Court in this case concluded that
the fines here serve “no remedial purpose” but rather are “intended
to deter homeless individuals from residing in Grants Pass.” App.
to Pet. for Cert. 189a. Because it concluded that the fines are
punitive, it went on to determine that the fines are
“ ‘grossly disproportionate to the gravity of the
offense’ ” and thus excessive. Ibid. The Ninth Circuit
declined to consider this holding because the City presented “no
meaningful argument on appeal regarding the excessive fines issue.”
72 F. 4th, at 895. On remand, the Ninth Circuit is free to consider
whether the City forfeited its appeal on this ground and, if not,
whether this issue has merit.

															C

															Finally, the Court does not decide whether the
Ordinances violate the Due Process Clause. “The Due Process Clauses
of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments ensure that officials may
not displace certain rules associated with criminal liability that
are ‘so old and venerable,’ ‘ “so rooted in the traditions and
conscience of our people[,] as to be ranked as
fundamental.” ’ ” Ante, at 15 (quoting
Kahler v. Kansas, 589 U.S. 271, 279 (2020)). The
majority notes that due process arguments in Robinson “may
have made some sense.” Ante, at 19. On that score, I agree.
“[H]istorically, crimes in England and this country have usually
required proof of some act (or actus reus) undertaken with
some measure of volition (mens rea).” Ibid. “This
view ‘took deep and early root in American soil’ where, to this
day, a crime ordinarily arises ‘only from concurrence of an
evil-meaning mind with an evil-doing hand.’ Morissette v.
United States, 342 U.S.
246, 251–252 (1952).” Ibid. Yet the law at issue in
Robinson “was an anomaly, as it required proof of neither of
those things.” Ante, at 19.

															Relatedly, this Court has concluded that some
vagrancy laws are unconstitutionally vague. See,
e.g., Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S.
352, 361–362 (1983) (invalidating California law that required
people who loiter or wander on the street to provide identification
and account for their presence); Papachristou v.
Jacksonville, 405 U.S.
156, 161–162 (1972) (concluding that vagrancy law employing
“ ‘archaic language’ ” in its definition was “void for
vagueness”); accord, Desertrain v. Los Angeles, 754
F.3d 1147, 1155–1157 (CA9 2014) (holding that an ordinance
prohibiting the use of a vehicle as “ ‘living quarters’ ”
was void for vagueness because the ordinance did not define “living
quarters”). Other potentially relevant due process precedents
abound. See, e.g., Winters v. New York,
333 U.S.
507, 520 (1948) (“Where a statute is so vague as to make
criminal an innocent act, a conviction under it cannot be
sustained”); Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S.
41, 57 (1999) (opinion of Stevens, J.) (invalidating ordinance
that failed “to distinguish between innocent conduct and conduct
threatening harm”).

															The Due Process Clause may well place
constitutional limits on anti-homelessness ordinances. See,
e.g., Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa
County, 415 U.S.
250, 263–264 (1974) (considering statute that denied people
medical care depending on duration of residency and concluding that
“to the extent the purpose of the [statute] is to inhibit the
immigration of indigents generally, that goal is constitutionally
impermissible”); Pottinger v. Miami, 
810 F. Supp. 1551, 1580 (SD Fla. 1992) (concluding that
“enforcement of laws that prevent homeless individuals who have no
place to go from sleeping” might also unconstitutionally “burde[n]
their right to travel”); see also ante, at 21, n. 5
(noting that these Ordinances “may implicate due process and our
precedents regarding selective prosecution”).

															D

															The Ordinances might also implicate other
legal issues. See, e.g., Trop, 356 U. S.,
at 101 (plurality opinion) (concluding that a law that banishes
people threatens “the total destruction of the individual’s status
in organized society”); Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 21 (describing the Ordinances here as “akin to a form of
banishment, a measure that is now generally recognized as contrary
to our Nation’s legal tradition”); Lavan v. Los
Angeles, 693 F.3d 1022, 1029 (CA9 2012) (holding that a city
violated homeless plaintiffs’ Fourth Amendment rights by seizing
and destroying property in an encampment, because “[v]iolation of a
City ordinance does not vitiate the Fourth Amendment’s protection
of one’s property”).

															The Court’s misstep today is confined to its
application of Robinson. It is quite possible, indeed
likely, that these and similar ordinances will face more days in
court.

															*  *  *

															Homelessness in America is a complex and
heartbreaking crisis. People experiencing homelessness face immense
challenges, as do local and state governments. Especially in the
face of these challenges, this Court has an obligation to apply the
Constitution faithfully and evenhandedly.

															The Eighth Amendment prohibits punishing
homelessness by criminalizing sleeping outside when an individual
has nowhere else to go. It is cruel and unusual to apply any
penalty “selectively to minorities whose numbers are few, who are
outcasts of society, and who are unpopular, but whom society is
willing to see suffer though it would not countenance general
application of the same penalty across the board.” Furman v.
Georgia, 408 U.S.
238, 245 (1972) (Douglas, J., concurring).

															I remain hopeful that our society will come
together “to address the complexities of the homelessness challenge
facing the most vulnerable among us.” Ante, at 34. That
responsibility is shared by those vulnerable populations, the
States and cities in which they reside, and each and every one of
us. “It is only after we begin to see a street as our
street, a public park as our park, a school as our
school, that we can become engaged citizens, dedicating our time
and resources for worthwhile causes.” M. Desmond, Evicted: Property
and Profit in the American City 294 (2016).

															This Court, too, has a role to play in
faithfully enforcing the Constitution to prohibit punishing the
very existence of those without shelter. I remain hopeful that
someday in the near future, this Court will play its role in
safeguarding constitutional liberties for the most vulnerable among
us. Because the Court today abdicates that role, I respectfully
dissent.

Notes
1
 The City’s “sleeping”
ordinance prohibits sleeping “on public sidewalks, streets, or
alleyways at any time as a matter of individual and public safety.”
§5.61.020(A). That ordinance is not before the Court today because,
after the only class representative with standing to challenge this
ordinance died, the Ninth Circuit remanded to the District Court
“to determine whether a substitute representative is available as
to that challenge alone.” 72 F. 4th 868, 884 (2023).
2
 See ante, at 20
(“[N]o one has asked us to reconsider Robinson. Nor do we
see any need to do so today”); but see ante, at 23
(gratuitously noting that Robinson “sits uneasily with the
Amendment’s terms, original meaning, and our precedents”). The most
important takeaway from these unnecessary swipes at Robinson
is just that. They are unnecessary. Robinson remains binding
precedent, no matter how incorrectly the majority applies it to
these facts.
3
 The majority does not
contest that the Ordinances, as enforced, are intended to target
homeless people. The majority observes, however, that the council
also discussed other ways to handle homelessness in Grants Pass.
See ante, at 12, n. 1. That is true. Targeted enforcement of
the Ordinances to criminalize homelessness was only one solution
discussed at the meeting. See App. 131–132 (listing “[a]ctions to
move forward,” including increasing police presence, exclusion
zones, “zero tolerance” signs, “do not serve” or “most unwanted”
lists, trespassing letters, and building a sobering center or youth
center (internal quotation marks omitted)).
4
 Some district courts have
since interpreted Martin broadly, relying on it to enjoin
time, place, and manner restrictions on camping outside. See
ante, at 7–10, 28–29. This Court is not asked today to
consider any of these interpretations or extensions of
Martin.
5
 The majority claims that
this dissent does not dispute that Robinson is “hard to
square” with the Eighth Amendment’s “text and this Court’s other
precedents.” Ante, at 32. That is wrong. See supra,
at 12 (recognizing Robinson’s well-established rule). The
majority also claims that this dissent “ignores Robinson’s
own insistence that a different result would have obtained in that
case if the law there had proscribed an act rather than status
alone.” Ante, at 32. That too is wrong. See supra, at
11–12 (discussing Robinson’s distinction between status and
conduct).
6
 The majority does not
address whether the Eighth Amendment requires a more particularized
inquiry into the circumstances of the individuals subject to the
City’s ordinances. See Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 27. I therefore do not discuss that issue
here.


