::decision_cite:: 23-108
::decision_name::  Snyder v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–108

															_________________

															JAMES E. SNYDER, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the seventh circuit

															[June 26, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, with whom Justice Sotomayor
and Justice Kagan join, dissenting.

															Officials who use their public positions for
private gain threaten the integrity of our most important
institutions. Greed makes governments—at every level—less
responsive, less efficient, and less trustworthy from the
perspective of the communities they serve. Perhaps realizing this,
Congress used “expansive, unqualified language” in 18
U. S. C. §666 to criminalize graft involving state,
local, and tribal entities, as well as other organizations
receiving federal funds. Salinas v. United States,
522 U.S.
52, 56 (1997). Section 666 imposes federal criminal penalties
on agents of those entities who “corruptly” solicit, accept, or
agree to accept payments “intending to be influenced or rewarded.”
§666(a)(1)(B).

															Today’s case involves one such person. James
Snyder, a former Indiana mayor, was convicted by a jury of
violating §666 after he steered more than $1 million in city
contracts to a local truck dealership, which turned around and cut
him a $13,000 check. He asks us to decide whether the language of
§666 criminalizes both bribes and gratuities, or just bribes. And
he says the answer matters because bribes require an upfront
agreement to take official actions for payment, and he never
agreed beforehand to be paid the $13,000 from the dealership.

															Snyder’s absurd and atextual reading of the
statute is one only today’s Court could love. Ignoring the plain
text of §666—which, again, expressly targets officials who
“corruptly” solicit, accept, or agree to accept payments “intending
to be influenced or rewarded”—the Court concludes
that the statute does not criminalize gratuities at all. This is
so, apparently, because “[s]tate and local governments often
regulate the gifts that state and local officials may accept,”
ante, at 1, which, according to the majority, means that
§666 cannot.

															The Court’s reasoning elevates nonexistent
federalism concerns over the plain text of this statute and is a
quintessential example of the tail wagging the dog. Section 666’s
regulation of state, local, and tribal governments reflects
Congress’s express choice to reach those and other entities
receiving federal funds. And Congress not only had good reasons for
doing so, it also had the authority to take such legislative
action, as this Court has already recognized. See Sabri v.
United States, 541 U.S.
600, 605, 608 (2004). We have long held that when Congress has
appropriated federal money, it “does not have to sit by and accept
the risk of operations thwarted by local and state improbity.”
Id., at 605.

															Both the majority and Snyder suggest that
interpreting §666 to cover gratuities is problematic because it
gives “federal prosecutors unwarranted power to allege crimes that
should be handled at the State level.” App. 14–15 (emphasis
added); see also ante, at 10–11. But woulds, coulds, and
shoulds of this nature must be addressed across the street with
Congress, not in the pages of the U. S. Reports. We have
previously and wisely declined “to express [a] view as to [§666’s]
soundness as a policy matter.” Sabri, 541 U. S., at
608, n. But, today, the Court can stay silent no longer. Its
decision overrides the intent of Congress—and the policy
preferences of the constituents that body represents—as
unequivocally expressed by the plain text of the statute.
Respectfully, I dissent.

															I

															Section 666 is a relatively recent solution to
an old problem. It seeks to ensure that “taxpayer dollars
. . . are in fact spent for the general welfare, and not
frittered away in graft.” Id., at 605. Accordingly, the
statute applies to certain entities that receive a threshold amount
of federal funds. It covers any “agent of an organization, or of a
State, local, or Indian tribal government, or any agency thereof.”
§666(a)(1). The entity must “receiv[e], in any one year period,
benefits in excess of $10,000 under a Federal program involving a
. . . form of Federal assistance.” §666(b).

															If an entity meets that description, the statute
imposes federal criminal penalties on any agent who

															“corruptly solicits or demands for the
benefit of any person, or accepts or agrees to accept, anything of
value from any person, intending to be influenced or rewarded in
connection with any business, transaction, or series of
transactions of such organization, government, or agency involving
any thing of value of $5,000 or more.” §666(a)(1)(B).

															In short, §666(a)(1)(B) makes it a federal crime
for state, local, or tribal officials to corruptly solicit, accept,
or agree to accept certain payments in connection with business
worth $5,000 or more. A neighboring provision similarly imposes
penalties on the giver—i.e., anyone who “corruptly gives,
offers, or agrees to give” payments “with intent to influence or
reward” these officials. §666(a)(2). For offenders of either
provision, the penalty is a fine, a maximum of 10 years in prison,
or both. §666(a).

															There is no dispute that §666 criminalizes
bribes. See ante, at 1. This Court has also been clear about
what a bribe requires: “a quid pro quo.” United
States v. Sun-Diamond Growers of Cal., 526 U.S.
398, 404 (1999). A quid pro quo means “a specific intent
to give or receive something of value in exchange for an
official act.” Id., at 404–405. So, for a payment to
constitute a bribe, there must be an upfront agreement to exchange
the payment for taking an official action. See ibid.

															Legislatures have also considered it similarly
wrongful for government officials to accept gratuities under
certain circumstances, but unlike bribes, gratuities do not have a
quid pro quo requirement. Generally speaking, rather than an
actual agreement to take payment as the impetus for engaging in an
official act (a quid pro quo exchange), gratuities “may
constitute merely a reward for some future act that the public
official will take (and may already have determined to take), or
for a past act that he has already taken.” Id., at 405.

															We took this case to resolve “[w]hether section
666 criminalizes gratuities, i.e., payments in
recognition of actions the official has already taken or committed
to take, without any quid pro quo agreement to take those actions.”
Pet. for Cert. I. The majority today answers no, when the answer to
that question should be an unequivocal yes.

															II

															A

															To reach the right conclusion we need not
march through various auxiliary analyses: We can begin—and end—with
only the text. See National Assn. of Mfrs. v. Department
of Defense, 583 U.S. 109, 127 (2018). We “understan[d] that
Congress says in a statute what it means and means in a statute
what it says there.” Hartford Underwriters Ins. Co. v.
Union Planters Bank, N. A., 530 U.S.
1, 6 (2000) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															1

															By its plain terms, §666 imposes criminal
penalties on state, local, and tribal officials who “corruptly”
solicit, accept, or agree to accept “anything of value from any
person, intending to be influenced or rewarded.” §666(a)(1)(B). Use
of the term “influenced” captures quid pro quo bargains
struck before an official act is taken—and therefore bribes—as
everyone agrees. Brief for Petitioner 17; Brief for United States
21; cf. Sun-Diamond, 526 U. S., at 404–405. The term
“rewarded” easily covers the concept of gratuities paid to corrupt
officials after the fact—no upfront agreement necessary.

															As a general matter (and setting aside for the
moment that §666 covers only officials who act “corruptly”),
everyone knows what a reward is. It is a $20 bill pulled from a
lost wallet at the time of its return to its grateful owner. A
surprise ice cream outing after a report card with straight As. The
bar tab picked up by a supervisor celebrating a job well done by
her team. A reward often says “thank you” or “good job,” rather
than “please.”

															Dictionary definitions confirm what common sense
tells us about what it means to be rewarded. A “reward” is “[t]hat
which is given in return for good or evil done or received,”
including “that which is offered or given for some service or
attainment.” Webster’s New International Dictionary 2136 (2d ed.
1957). The verb form of the word is no different. To “reward” means
“to . . . recompense.” Ibid. (defining “to reward”
as “[t]o make a return, or give a reward, to (a person) or for (a
service, etc.); to requite; recompense; repay”). Both definitions
thus encompass payment in recognition of an action that an official
has already taken or committed to taking. And neither requires
there to be some beforehand agreement about that exchange,
i.e., a quid pro quo.

															Snyder concedes that the term “rewarded” can
encompass the concept of gratuities. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 5; see
also Reply Brief 3 (quoting Sun-Diamond, 526 U. S., at
405). The majority—which doesn’t bother to interpret “rewarded”
until the end of its opinion—eventually admits the same. See
ante, at 15 (“[T]he word ‘rewarded’ could be part of a
gratuities statute”). By that point in its analysis, however, the
majority has already characterized §666 as a bribery statute. And
then, because we typically seek to give effect to each word of a
statute, see TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U.S.
19, 31 (2001), the majority must strain to make the word
“rewarded” as it appears in §666 relevant, rather than meaningless.
It offers rank speculation as to why “rewarded” in §666 might mean
something other than what it ordinarily does, ultimately assigning
the word some busy work relating to potential defenses to bribery
charges. See ante, at 15. But whatever the merits of the
majority’s assertions involving waterfronts, belts, and suspenders,
its interpretation of §666 finds little grounding in the actual
text of the statute. See Luna Perez v. Sturgis Public
Schools, 598 U.S. 142, 150 (2023) (“ ‘[W]e cannot replace
the actual text with speculation as to Congress’
intent’ ”).

															2

															Speaking of text: The language of other
statutes demonstrates that Congress uses the word “reward” when it
wants to criminalize gratuities. For example, in 18
U. S. C. §1912, Congress imposed criminal penalties on
any federal officer “engaged in inspection of vessels” who
“receives any fee or reward for his services, except what is
allowed to him by law.” (Emphasis added.) And in 22
U. S. C. §4202, Congress provided for the sanctioning of
“any consular officer . . . who demands or
receives for any official services . . . any fee or
reward other than the fee provided by law for such service.”
(Emphasis added.) Snyder admits that these statutes target
gratuities by virtue of Congress’s use of the term “reward.” Brief
for Petitioner 31.

															But rather than simply calling a statute that
penalizes accepting a “reward” for public business what it is—a
wrongful or illegal gratuities statute—the majority insists that,
sometimes, when Congress uses “reward,” it is still just
criminalizing quid pro quo bribery, mustering up examples to
show that “bribery statutes sometimes use the term ‘reward.’ ”
Ante, at 15. However, none of the majority’s examples use
the term “reward” in a way that is relevantly similar to §666. For
one thing, the majority’s examples do not use the phrase
“influenced or rewarded” to delineate between bribes and
gratuities, while covering both, as §666 does. In addition, each of
the statutes the majority points to explicitly links the forbidden
“reward” to an agreement to take some specific action; in other
words, the majority’s examples specify, by their plain text, a
quid pro quo. For example, 18 U. S. C. §600
imposes federal criminal penalties on anyone who “promises,”
inter alia, jobs or benefits “provided for or made possible
in whole or in part by any Act of Congress” to another person “as
consideration, favor, or reward for” certain political activity.
That statute identifies both a forbidden quid (a future job)
and quo (political activity).[1]

															In contrast with those statutes, when §666 uses
“rewarded,” it never connects that term to some upfront exchange.
What the majority’s examples actually show, then, is that when
Congress wants to use the term “reward” to encompass only bribes,
it knows just how to do so. See Henson v. Santander
Consumer USA Inc., 582 U.S. 79, 86 (2017) (“[W]e presume
differences in language like this convey differences in
meaning”).

															B

															In an attempt to shore up its unnatural
reading of §666, the majority turns to statutory and legislative
history. Ante, at 5, 8–9. Where appropriate, I, too, find
statutory and legislative history to be useful tools that this
Court can and should consult. See, e.g., Delaware v.
Pennsylvania, 598 U.S. 115, 138–139 (2023). But resort to
these tools is questionable under certain circumstances. See
Milner v. Department of Navy, 562
U.S. 562, 574 (2011) (“When presented, on the one hand, with
clear statutory language and, on the other, with dueling committee
reports, we must choose the language”). In any event, here, the
statutory and legislative history only make matters worse for the
majority’s analysis.

															Section 666 traces its lineage to 18
U. S. C. §201, though the kinship is more attenuated
than the majority lets on. Section 201 indeed “contains
comprehensive prohibitions on bribes and gratuities to federal
officials.” Ante, at 4 (discussing §§201(b)–(c)). But
initially, it was not entirely clear which officials that
federal statute covered. By its terms, §201 applies broadly to
“public officials,” see §201(a), and confusion arose among some
lower courts as to “whether state and local employees could be
considered ‘public officials’ ” under the statute.
Salinas, 522 U. S., at 58. Without awaiting our
resolution of the issue, Congress enacted §666 in 1984.
Ibid.; see also 98Stat. 2143.

															In §666, Congress expressly sought to reach
state and local officials “to protect the integrity of the vast
sums of money distributed through Federal programs.” S. Rep.
No. 98–225, p. 370 (1983). As originally enacted, §666
barred those officials from soliciting, accepting, or agreeing to
accept “anything of value . . . for or because of the
recipient’s conduct,” §666(b) (1982 ed., Supp. II), using language
similar to that in §201(c), the federal-official gratuities
provision. Crucially, no one disputes that when it was initially
enacted, §666 prohibited both bribes and gratuities.
Ante, at 4. Similarly significant (though unmentioned by the
majority), Congress imposed the same 10-year maximum term of
imprisonment for a violation then as it does now. See §666(b) (1982
ed., Supp. II); cf. ante, at 14 (describing it as
“unfathomable that Congress would authorize a 10-year criminal
sentence for gifts to 19 million state and local officials” without
federal guidance).

															Starting with this historical disadvantage
regarding the scope of the statute, the majority must show that
Congress made major changes to §666 that might account for the
sans-gratuity interpretation the majority adopts today. But several
features of the statutory and legislative history convince me of
the opposite.

															For one, Congress said that it was not
making major changes to the statute. The 1986 revisions to §666
were part of a package of changes that Congress specifically deemed
“technical and minor.” H. R. Rep. No. 99–797, p. 16
(1986); see also Criminal Law and Procedure Technical Amendments
Act of 1986, 100Stat. 3592. And the revisions themselves are
largely in keeping with this characterization. Relevant here,
Congress teased out a “corruptly” mens rea requirement and
swapped the previous “for or because of ” language for the
current “intending to be influenced or rewarded” phrasing.
Id., at 3613. None of this, on its face, evinces clear
congressional intent to extract an entire category of previously
covered illicit payments from §666.

															Undeterred, the majority says that when Congress
amended §666, it was attempting to fashion that provision after
§201(b)—the bribery statute that covers federal officials. See
ante, at 8–9.[2] Again,
the statutory and legislative record suggests otherwise: In fact,
history establishes that Congress had a different model statute in
mind.

															Congress had used a phrase identical to §666’s
“intending to be influenced or rewarded” language just a few months
before when it amended 18 U. S. C. §215, an
anticorruption statute that applies to bank employees. See 100Stat.
779. That provision imposes criminal penalties on any bank employee
who “corruptly solicits or demands . . . or corruptly
accepts or agrees to accept, anything of value from any person,
intending to be influenced or rewarded in connection with
any business or transaction.” Ibid. (emphasis added); see
also §215(a)(2). And this similarity was no coincidence. The House
Report the majority quotes as explicating §666 confirms that §666
was meant to track §215—not §201(b), as the majority claims.
See H. R. Rep. No. 99–797, at 30, n. 9.

															This means, of course, that if §215 criminalizes
gratuities, it is likely §666 does as well. But the majority labels
§215 “a null data point,” evidently because this Court has never
interpreted that statute. Ante, at 9, n. 4. Section
215’s relevance to §666 does not come from any interpretation,
however—it is plain on the face of that statute, which uses the
exact same “influenced or rewarded” phrase. And the history of that
model provision indicates that Congress meant for §215 to reach
gratuities, too. For example, a House Report directly speaks of
§215 as a statute criminalizing gratuities: It says that, before
1986, §215 made “it criminal for a bank official to accept any
gratuity, no matter how trivial, after that official ha[d]
taken official action on bank business.” H. R. Rep. No.
99–335, p. 6, n. 25 (1985) (emphasis added). Congress
amended §215 in 1986 to “narro[w]” the statute, but not by carving
out gratuities altogether. Ibid. Rather it narrowed the “law
by requiring that the acceptance of the gratuity be done
corruptly.” Ibid. (emphasis added).[3] Astute readers will recall that Congress
made exactly this same narrowing edit to §666. See supra, at
9.

															In short, Congress tailored §215 in an effort to
stem “ ‘corruption in the bank industry,’ ” and it seemed
to think that both bribes and gratuities contributed
to that problem. H. R. Rep. No. 99–335, at 5. So, too, with
§666 and public corruption.

															III

															To recap what we know thus far: The question
in this case is whether §666 criminalizes gratuities in addition to
bribes. The text and purpose of §666 alone provide an easy answer.
The word “rewarded” means to have been given a reward for some
action taken. So gratuities are plainly covered. To be sure, if the
Court had given that straightforward answer, we might eventually
have confronted a followup question: Are all gratuities
covered? Said differently: Even if gratuities generally are
criminalized by §666, are there circumstances in which certain
gratuities are not criminalized?

															The case in front of us does not require us to
reach that question. We have not been asked to settle, once and for
all, which gratuities are corrupt and which are quotidian. Snyder
did not argue that his $13,000 check was part of some subset of
noncriminalized gratuities. Rather (and this is important to note),
Snyder has taken an all-or-nothing approach to the argument he
makes in this case. He insists that all gratuities—every
type in the entire class—are excluded from §666. Because the
statute’s plain text says otherwise, that should have been the end
of this case, even if a future petitioner might have asked us to do
a more nuanced analysis.

															But, no matter—the majority today skips ahead,
complaining that the Government has “not identif[ied] any remotely
clear lines separating an innocuous or obviously benign gratuity
from a criminal gratuity.” Ante, at 12. This omission is a
huge problem, the majority says, because without those lines, “19
million state and local officials” could be imprisoned “for
accepting even commonplace gratuities.” Ante, at 1.

															The majority’s fretting falls flat, especially
in the context of this case. There is no question that
state, local, and tribal officials deserve “clear lines,” but we
were not asked to provide all of them at this moment.[4] And, perhaps even more important, nothing
about the facts of this case even remotely implicates a reasonable
concern about the criminalization of innocuous conduct on the part
of an unwary official. Furthermore, most of the clear lines the
majority seeks already exist—they come from the text of the
statute. Limits within the text of §666 provide “fair notice” that
commonplace gratuities are typically not within the statute’s
reach, contra, ante, at 11, and they suffice to prevent
prosecution of the gift cards, burrito bowls, and steak dinners
that derail today’s decision.[5]

															A

															If one simply accepts what the statute says it
covers—local officials who corruptly solicit, accept, or agree to
accept rewards in connection with official business worth over a
certain amount—Snyder’s case is an easy one. Perhaps that is why
the majority spends so little time describing it.

															Snyder took office as mayor of the city of
Portage, Indiana, in January 2012. As mayor, Snyder and his
appointees sat on the Portage Board of Works and Public Safety, the
entity that managed public bidding on city contracts. Snyder put
one of his friends, Randy Reeder, in charge of the bidding process,
despite Reeder’s lack of experience in administering public bids.
Evidence presented at Snyder’s trial showed that Reeder tailored
bid specifications for two different city contracts to favor Great
Lakes Peterbilt, a truck dealership owned by brothers Robert Buha
and Stephen Buha. Evidence also showed that during the bidding
process, Snyder was in contact with the Buha brothers, but no other
bidders.

															Snyder had campaigned on a platform that
included automating trash collection, and by December 2012, the
city was looking to buy three garbage trucks. It issued an
invitation to bid on the contract, listing specific requirements
for the trucks. Reeder testified that he crafted some
specifications, including delivery within 150 days, knowing they
would favor Great Lakes Peterbilt. The board of works voted to
award Great Lakes Peterbilt the contract. Evidence at trial showed
that the city could have saved about $60,000 had it not prioritized
expedited delivery.

															In January 2013, the manager of Great Lakes
Peterbilt asked Reeder whether the city might want to buy another
truck—an unused, 2012 model that had been sitting outside on the
dealership’s lot over two winters. Snyder first tried to buy the
truck outright, but Portage’s city attorney informed him he had to
go through the public bidding process. So the board of works issued
another invitation to bid in November 2013. This invitation sought
two more garbage trucks. Reeder again tweaked certain
specifications to favor Great Lakes Peterbilt—this time to help it
move the older truck sitting on its lot. The board of works voted
to award Great Lakes Peterbilt this contract too. Together, the two
contracts that Great Lakes Peterbilt “won” totaled some $1.125
million.

															Shortly after the second contract was awarded,
Snyder paid the Buha brothers a visit at their dealership. “I need
money,” he said. App. 72. He asked for $15,000; the dealership gave
him $13,000. When federal investigators heard about the payment and
came calling, Snyder told them the check was for information
technology and health insurance consulting services that he had
provided to the dealership. He gave different explanations for the
money to Reeder and a different city employee.

															Employees at Great Lakes Peterbilt testified
that Snyder never performed any consulting work for the dealership.
And during the federal investigation, no written agreements, work
product, evidence of meetings, invoices, or other documentation was
ever produced relating to any consulting work performed by Snyder.
All of this confirmed testimony from the dealership’s controller,
who had cut the check to Snyder: Snyder had instead been paid for
an “ ‘inside track. ’ ” App. to Pet. for Cert.
60a–61a.

															A federal grand jury charged Snyder with
violating 18 U. S. C. §666(a)(1)(B). App. 2–3. The
indictment alleged that Snyder “did corruptly solicit, demand,
accept, and agree to accept a bank check in the amount of $13,000,
intending to be influenced and rewarded.” Id., at 3. A jury
found him guilty of violating §666 in connection with the garbage
truck contracts. It is not difficult to see why the jury reached
that conclusion, having been instructed that the Government needed
to prove that Snyder “acted corruptly, with the intent to be
influenced or rewarded.” Id., at 27.[6]

															B

															One thing is clear from the Court’s opinion in
this case—the majority isn’t much worried about what happens to
Snyder under §666. It pivots to the other 18,999,999 state, local,
and tribal officials at work throughout the country and laments
that there are “no clear federal rules” for them. Ante, at
12. But §666 was not designed to apply to teachers accepting fruit
baskets, soccer coaches getting gift cards, or newspaper delivery
guys who get a tip at Christmas. See ibid. (reciting similar
examples). We know this because, beyond requiring acceptance of a
reward, §666 weaves together multiple other elements (that the
Government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt), which
collectively do the nuanced work of sifting illegal gratuities from
inoffensive ones.

															Those limits are clear on the face of the
statute; when construed as a whole, the text of §666 provides more
than adequate notice to those this statute covers. Now, for a list
of my own: First, §666 applies only when a state, local,
tribal, or private entity “receives, in any one year period,
benefits in excess of $10,000 under a Federal program involving”
some “form of Federal assistance.” §666(b). Second, the
statute requires that the criminalized payment be “in connection
with any business, transaction, or series of transactions” of the
covered entity. §§666(a)(1)(B), (a)(2). Third, that
“business, transaction, or series of transactions” must involve
“[some]thing of value of $5,000 or more.” Ibid.
Fourth, §666 expressly “does not apply to bona fide salary,
wages, fees, or other compensation paid . . . in the
usual course of business.” §666(c). Nor does it apply to “expenses
paid or reimbursed . . . in the usual course of
business.” Ibid. Last, and perhaps most important,
the statute specifically requires that the official who solicits,
accepts, or agrees to accept the payment do so “corruptly” (the
mens rea). §666(a)(1)(B). This series of carefully
delineated circumstances—all of which appear in the text of
§666—means that payments or gifts to officials will not always be
captured by §666 under any and all circumstances, but only if the
violator acts in the ways described and with the required
intent.

															Notably, the majority takes the last statutory
check I describe—the “corruptly” mens rea requirement—and
transforms it into a reason to read the statute to cover only
bribes. See ante, at 7–8, 15. The majority maintains that
“corruptly” signals that §666 is a bribery statute because §201(b),
the federal-official bribery statute, uses that term. Ibid.
But, as I have already explained, the bribery statute for federal
officials is not the blueprint the majority makes it out to be. See
Part II–B, supra. And while the majority suggests that
“corruptly” just means quid pro quo, see ante, at 8,
it can give no reason why that must be so in this
statute.

															Instead, the majority gives a practical
justification for its preferred interpretation. It suggests that if
§666 is read generally to apply to gratuities, and “corruptly” is
read as a narrowing mens rea element, then the statute
still might sweep in all sorts of innocuous gifts. See
ante, at 12–13. Maybe. Maybe not. Again, the precise meaning
of the term “corruptly” is not the question before us today. Nor
does it really matter here because, whatever “corruptly” means,
Snyder’s behavior clearly fits the bill, making this case a poor
one to explore the contours of that term. See Part III–A,
supra.

															In any event, any uncertainty we might have
about “corruptly” seems unwarranted considering the Court’s
previous definitions of that word. In Arthur Andersen LLP v.
United States, 544 U.S.
696 (2005), we wrote that the term “ ‘corruptly’ ” is
“normally associated with wrongful, immoral, depraved, or evil”
conduct. Id., at 705. We therefore related the term with
“consciousness of wrongdoing.” Id., at 706. Applying that
standard definition to §666’s mens rea requirement appears
to heave an imposing burden onto the Government. Prosecutors must
prove not only that a state, local, or tribal official did, in
fact, act wrongfully when accepting the gift or payment, but also
that she knew that accepting the gift or payment was
wrongful.[7] The majority
worries that it may be unclear to an official whether accepting a
gift is, in fact, “wrongful.” See ante, at 12. But if
“corruptly” is read to require knowledge of wrongfulness, any lack
of clarity benefits the official. In such circumstances, a
prosecutor is almost certain to be unable to meet her burden of
proof—as the Government acknowledges. See, e.g., Tr.
of Oral Arg. 59–60, 107.[8]

															The bottom line is that §666 is not unique or
special. Like other criminal statutes—and especially other
anti-public-corruption statutes—§666 has various elements, some of
which may benefit from further clarification. Down the road, this
Court could have had that opportunity with respect to §666
if it had chosen to engage in our usual method of parsing
statutes. See, e.g., Fischer v. United
States, 529 U.S.
667, 677, 681 (2000) (clarifying the meaning of federal
“benefits” under §666); Sun-Diamond, 526 U. S., at 414
(holding that to establish a violation of §201(c), “the Government
must prove a link between a thing of value conferred upon a public
official and a specific ‘official act’ for or because of
which it was given” (emphasis added)); McDonnell v.
United States, 579 U.S. 550, 571–572 (2016) (clarifying the
“official act” requirement in §201(a)(3)). Instead, the majority
washes its hands of this anticorruption provision, announcing that
certain wrongful conduct the statute plainly covers just cannot be
included. The majority throws in the towel too soon.

															C

															As I said earlier, §666 already provides
meaningful guardrails that protect against the “overbreadth” that
the majority decries. Ante, at 12. But you don’t have to
take my word for that. Other prosecutions of gratuities that the
Government has brought under §666—successfully or unsuccessfully—do
not remotely resemble the holiday tips, gift baskets, and
sweatshirts around which the majority crafts its decision.[9] That is, even as the Government has
consistently maintained that §666 covers gratuities, its actual
prior prosecutions under §666 were not the dragnet for public
school teachers, soccer coaches, or trash collectors that the
majority conjures. Rather, the real cases in which the Government
has invoked this law involve exactly the type of palm
greasing that the statute plainly covers and that one might
reasonably expect Congress to care about when targeting graft in
state, local, and tribal governments. After today, however, the
ability of the Federal Government to prosecute such obviously
wrongful conduct is left in doubt.

															It is also noteworthy that the prosecutions that
Snyder describes as proof of the Government’s “not reassuring”
track record, Reply Brief 18–19, look nothing like the acts of
gratitude that worry the majority. The “city building inspector
[who] solicit[ed] donations for his favorite youth sports league”?
Id., at 18. Well, he admitted to receiving illegal
gratuities from an engineer who worked with clients seeking
building permits in San Francisco. The engineer knew that the
inspector was a volunteer coach and supporter of “a San Francisco
non-profit adult and youth athletic organization,” and the engineer
arranged for his clients to donate to that organization in
connection with inspections of their properties. Press Release,
U. S. Attorney’s Office, ND Cal., San Francisco Senior
Building Inspector Pleads Guilty to Accepting Illegal Gratuities
(Dec. 9, 2022). “[I]n several instances, the engineer advised [the
inspector] of a client’s donation while asking for a final permit
or inspection on the client’s property.” Ibid. That same
inspector also accepted $30,000 in debt forgiveness from a longtime
San Francisco real-estate developer and friend. Ibid.

															And the “county contractor [who] donat[ed]
$2,000 for plaques and food at a luncheon honoring female judges”?
Reply Brief 18. He was the owner of a debt collection company that
had a nonexclusive contract with Cook County, Illinois, to perform
debt collection work. A significant part of the contract was the
chance to collect fines owed on unpaid traffic tickets. An official
in the Circuit Court of Cook County Clerk’s Office—the entity
responsible for doling out the traffic debt work—gave his firm half
of those collections. The owner then underwrote nearly $2,000 in
expenses for the court’s Women’s History Month Celebration. Why did
he cover these expenses? “We gotta stay ahead of [the
competition],” the owner told his staff. United States v.
Donagher, No. 1:19–cr–00240 (ND Ill.), ECF Doc. 98, pp.
2–5.[10]

															None of this means that courts should trust the
Government when it says that it does and will continue to enforce a
statute with care. That is not how we do statutory interpretation,
and for good reason. See Marinello v. United States,
584 U.S. 1, 11 (2018). But what these examples do show is that
§666’s built-in bulwarks seem to be working. Thus, there is simply
no reason to think that decades after the courts of appeals first
interpreted §666 to cover gratuities, reading the statute to do so
now will “suddenly subject 19 million state and local officials to
a new and different regulatory regime.” Ante, at 11.

															IV

															Ultimately, it appears that the real bone the
majority has to pick with §666 is its concern about
overregulation—a concern born of the relationship between federal
and state governance. The majority’s pages of citations to state
and local gratuities laws, ante, at 2–3, thus belie its
ranking so-called “federalism” interests merely “[f]ifth” on its
list of reasons for construing §666 as a bribery-only statute,
ante, at 10 (emphasis deleted). More than anything, it seems
that the majority itself harbors the belief it repeatedly ascribes
to Congress: that regulation of gratuities is better left to state,
local, and tribal governments, rather than the Federal Government.
See, e.g., ante, at 11, 16. (No word on why
the same could not be said for bribes.)

															If Congress shared those policy concerns,
however, it chose not to act upon them in this statute. Instead,
Congress reached out to regulate state, local, and tribal entities
as well as other organizations that receive federal funds, despite
the fact that those governments do have their own ethics
regulations, as the majority is quick to point out. And, of course,
if the majority is correct about Congress’s commitment to
federalism principles in this area, one wonders why Congress didn’t
just leave state, local, and tribal entities alone.

															Quite to the contrary, Congress chose to enact
§666 “to ensure the integrity of organizations participating in
federal assistance programs.” Fischer, 529 U. S., at
678. And that choice was intentional—Congress acted to “addres[s] a
legitimate federal concern by licensing federal prosecution in an
area historically of state concern.” Sabri, 541 U. S.,
at 608, n. Snyder apparently objects to this policy choice, and
further complained below that “Congress ha[d] yet to take up” any
invitation “to consider rewriting the provision.” App. 15.
Fortunately for him, today’s decision by this Court accomplishes
exactly that result.

															*  *  *

															State, local, and tribal governments have an
important role to play in combating public corruption, and, of
course, their regulations should reflect the values of the
communities they serve. I wholeheartedly agree with the majority’s
suggestion that, because employees of those governments are our
neighbors, friends, and hometown heroes, federal law ought not be
read to subject them to prosecution when grateful members of the
community show their thanks. See ante, at 1.

															But nothing about the facts of this case
implicates any of that kind of conduct. And the text of §666
clearly covers the kind of corrupt (albeit perhaps non-quid pro
quo) payment Snyder solicited after steering the city contracts
to the dealership. Because reading §666 to prohibit gratuities—just
as it always has—poses no genuine threat to common gift giving, but
does honor Congress’s intent to punish rewards corruptly accepted
by government officials in ways that are functionally
indistinguishable from taking a bribe, I respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
 See also 33
U. S. C. §447 (imposing penalties on “[e]very person
who . . . gives any sum of money or other bribe,
present, or reward . . . to any . . . employee
of the office of any supervisor of a harbor with intent to
influence such . . . employee to permit or overlook any
violation of the provisions of this subchapter”).
2
 Section 201(b)(2)(A)
imposes federal criminal penalties on “[w]hoever . . .
being a public official . . . corruptly demands, seeks,
receives, accepts, or agrees to receive or accept anything of value
. . . in return for . . . being influenced in
the performance of any official act.”
3
 Piling on, I note that
the 1986 amendments to §215 also required federal agencies with
responsibility for regulating a financial institution to “establish
. . . guidelines” to help bank employees comply with the
statute. See 18 U. S. C. §215(d) (1982 ed., Supp. IV).
When those agencies followed through, they too expressly assumed
that §215 covered gratuities. See, e.g., 52 Fed. Reg.
46046 (1987); id., at 43940.
4
 Given the question
presented, the majority’s demand for a comprehensive interpretation
of §666, for all purposes, is both striking and inconsistent with
our usual incremental approach. See St. Amant v.
Thompson, 390 U.S.
727, 730–731 (1968) (observing that the “outer limits” of “many
legal standards”—whether they be “provided by the Constitution,
statutes, or case law”—are “marked out through case-by-case
adjudication”).
5
 Notably, I am not the
only Justice who has viewed §666 in this way. See Sorich v.
United States, 555 U.S. 1204, 1207 (2009) (Scalia, J.,
dissenting from denial of certiorari) (describing §666(a) as
providing a “clear rul[e]” prohibiting “bribes and gratuities to
public officials”).
6
 Even after its decision
to construe §666 as a bribery-only statute, the Court’s decision to
reverse Snyder’s conviction, rather than vacate and remand, is
perplexing. The District Court specifically found that, “even
if ” §666 were construed to penalize bribes alone, “there was
ample evidence permitting a rational jury to find, from the
circumstantial evidence, that there was an up-front agreement to
reward Snyder for making sure [Great Lakes Peterbilt] won the
contract award(s).” App. to Pet. for Cert. 63a. Thus, the Seventh
Circuit should have been permitted to assess in the first instance
whether any instructional error was prejudicial. Under our current
precedent, Snyder is not entitled to automatic relief due to a mere
instructional error. See, e.g., Greer v.
United States, 593 U.S. 503, 507, 513 (2021).
7
 At oral argument, the
Government acknowledged that “consciousness of wrongdoing” roughly
translates to knowledge of unlawfulness. Tr. of Oral Arg.
74–76.
8
 Thus, defining
“corruptly” in the same way we have in the past would not rely on a
prosecutor’s discretion to limit the scope of the statute. See
ante, at 13; cf. Marinello v. United States,
584 U.S. 1, 11 (2018). Indeed, though the Government could
attempt to launch unwarranted prosecutions under §666, that is as
true for §666 as it is for any other federal criminal
statute.
9
 See, e.g.,
Scarantino v. Public School Employees’ Retirement
Bd., 68 A.3d 375, 376–377 (Pa. Commw. 2013) (describing a
defendant prosecuted under §666 for receiving a $5,000 cash
gratuity in connection with school district contracts); United
States v. Musto, 2012 WL 5879609, *2, n. 2 (MD Pa.,
Nov. 21, 2012) (defendant prosecuted under §666 for accepting
$1,000 in connection with a municipality’s multimillion dollar loan
application to a state agency and prior official advocacy);
United States v. Bahel, 662 F.3d 610, 620–621, 638
(CA2 2011) (defendant prosecuted under §666 after receiving
financial benefits including years of near-monthly cash payments of
thousands of dollars, a laptop, first-class plane tickets to India,
seats to the U. S. Open tennis tournament, a reduced-rent
apartment, and the eventual purchase of that apartment for
below-market value in connection with United Nations contracts);
United States v. Zimmermann, 509 F.3d 920, 926–927
(CA8 2007) (defendant prosecuted for accepting gratuities of
$5,000, $1,200, and $1,000 in connection with real-estate
development projects).
10  Snyder’s invocation of United
States v. Hamilton, 46 F. 4th 389 (CA5 2022), is neither
persuasive nor relevant here. Snyder says Hamilton shows
that the Government “has prosecuted campaign contributions.” Reply
Brief 19. The defendant in Hamilton was a Dallas real-estate
developer who “supported” local politicians. 46 F. 4th, at 391. He
gave money to a nonprofit owned and operated by the campaign
manager of one such politician, a Dallas City Council member. “Some
of those donations were used for [the nonprofit’s] legitimate
purposes; others were purportedly given to [the nonprofit], cashed
by [the campaign manager], then given to [the politician]
personally.” Ibid. Around an election cycle, “[the
developer] was trying to secure some low-income-housing tax credits
for one of his real-estate ventures, the Royal Crest project,” and
that City Council member “lobbied to have the Royal Crest project
included.” Ibid. “A few years later, [the developer] needed
to get a paid-sick-leave ordinance on the ballot in the upcoming
election.” Ibid. So he wrote a $7,000 check to a different
member of the Dallas City Council, who made clear that the check
“was not a loan” and “had nothing to do with the campaign.”
Id., at 392. A jury convicted the developer on two §666
counts, but the Fifth Circuit later vacated the convictions
because, in its view, §666 did not criminalize gratuities.
Id., at 393, 399. On these facts, it is far from clear that
Hamilton involved legitimate campaign contributions. But it
is abundantly clear that Snyder’s case does not. If a §666
conviction involving real campaign contributions had reached
us, it might have been appropriate to read a quid pro quo
requirement into the statute for that particular context. See
McCormick v. United States, 500
U.S. 257, 273–274 (1991).


