::decision_cite:: 23-14
::decision_name::  Diaz v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–14

															_________________

															DELILAH GUADALUPE DIAZ, PETITIONER v.
UNITED STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															Justice Thomas delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Federal Rule of Evidence 704(b) prohibits expert
witnesses from stating opinions “about whether the defendant did or
did not have a mental state or condition that constitutes an
element of the crime charged or of a defense.” In this
drug-trafficking prosecution, petitioner argued that she lacked the
mental state required to convict because she was unaware that drugs
were concealed in her car when she drove it across the United
States-Mexico border. At trial, the Government’s expert witness
opined that most drug couriers know that they are transporting
drugs. Because the expert witness did not state an opinion about
whether petitioner herself had a particular mental state, we
conclude that the testimony did not violate Rule 704(b). We
therefore affirm.

															I

															In August 2020, Delilah Diaz, a United States
citizen, attempted to enter the United States from Mexico. When
Diaz drove into the port of entry, a border patrol officer asked
her to roll down the car’s rear driver-side window. Diaz responded
that the window was manual, so the officer left his inspection
booth and tried to roll down the window himself. The officer “felt
some resistance” and then heard “a crunch-like sound in the door.”
App. 25. Aware from experience that car doors are a common hiding
spot for contraband, the officer investigated further with a
“buster,” a handheld tool that measures an object’s density. After
the buster detected an abnormal density in the doors, officers
brought in a narcotics detection canine and sent the car through an
X-ray machine. They discovered 56 packages of methamphetamine
tucked inside the car’s door panels and underneath the carpet in
the trunk. The methamphetamine weighed just over 54 pounds and had
an estimated retail value of $368,550.

															Diaz was arrested and, after waiving her
Miranda rights, agreed to an interview. See Miranda
v. Arizona, 384 U.S.
436 (1966). Diaz claimed that she had no idea drugs were hidden
in the car. The officers, however, found her story hard to believe.
Diaz explained that she was driving her boyfriend’s car.
Contradictorily, she also told officers that she had seen her
boyfriend only “two, three times tops,” did not know his phone
number, and did not know where he lived. Response in Opposition in
No. 3:20–cr–02546 (SD Cal.), ECF Doc. 33–1, p. 13. Diaz’s
story grew even more dubious when officers questioned her about two
cellphones discovered inside the car. She acknowledged that she
owned one of the phones. But, she maintained the other phone had
been “given to [her]” by a friend—whom she would “rather not”
identify. Id., at 32, 34. And, she insisted that the phone
was “locked” and that she did not “have access to it.” Id.,
at 32–33.[1]

															Diaz was charged with importing methamphetamine
in violation of 21 U. S. C. §§952 and 960. The charges
required the Government to prove that Diaz “knowingly” transported
drugs. In response, Diaz asserted what is known colloquially as a
“blind mule” defense: she argued that she did not know that there
were drugs in the car. Before trial, the Government gave notice
that it would call Homeland Security Investigations Special Agent
Andrew Flood as an expert witness. Agent Flood would testify about
the common practices of Mexican drug-trafficking organizations.
Specifically, he planned to explain that drug traffickers
“generally do not entrust large quantities of drugs to people who
are unaware they are transporting them.” United States’ Notice, ECF
Doc. 30, p. 7.

															Diaz objected to Agent Flood’s proffered
testimony under Federal Rule of Evidence 704(b). That Rule provides
that, “[i]n a criminal case, an expert witness must not state an
opinion about whether the defendant did or did not have a mental
state or condition that constitutes an element of the crime charged
or of a defense.” Diaz argued that if Agent Flood testified that
drug traffickers never use unknowing couriers, that would be
functionally equivalent to an opinion about whether Diaz knowingly
transported drugs. The District Court granted Diaz’s motion in part
and denied it in part. The court agreed with Diaz that Agent Flood
could not testify in absolute terms about whether all couriers
knowingly transport drugs. But, insofar as Agent Flood planned to
testify only that most couriers know they are transporting drugs,
the court concluded that his testimony was admissible.

															At trial, Agent Flood testified that “in most
circumstances, the driver knows they are hired . . . to
take the drugs from point A to point B.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
15a. To use an unknowing courier, Agent Flood explained, would
expose the drug-trafficking organization to substantial risk. The
organization could not guarantee where, if at all, the drugs would
arrive. Id., at 16a, 26a. Even if the drugs reached the
intended destination, the organization would then have to retrieve
the drugs without detection. Id., at 16a, 24a–25a. According
to Agent Flood, drug-trafficking organizations are often unwilling
to take those chances with hundreds of thousands of dollars on the
line. Agent Flood acknowledged on cross-examination that
drug-trafficking organizations sometimes use unknowing
couriers.

															The jury found Diaz guilty, and the District
Court sentenced her to 84 months’ imprisonment. On appeal, Diaz
again challenged Agent Flood’s testimony under Rule 704(b). The
Court of Appeals held that Rule 704(b) prohibits only “an ‘explicit
opinion’ on the defendant’s state of mind.” 2023 WL 314309, *2
(CA9, Jan. 19, 2023). Because Agent Flood did not opine about
whether Diaz knowingly transported methamphetamine, the court
concluded that the testimony did not violate Rule 704(b).
Ibid.

															We granted certiorari, 601 U. S. ___
(2023), and now affirm.

															II

															Federal Rule of Evidence 704 addresses
“Opinion[s] on an Ultimate Issue.” Rule 704(a) sets out a general
rule that “[a]n opinion is not objectionable just because it
embraces an ultimate issue.” Rule 704(b) adds one caveat:

															“Exception: In a criminal case, an expert
witness must not state an opinion about whether the defendant did
or did not have a mental state or condition that constitutes an
element of the crime charged or of a defense. Those matters are for
the trier of fact alone.”

															Rule 704 departed from the once-prevailing
common-law practice. Prior to Rule 704, many States applied what
was known as the “ultimate issue” rule. That rule categorically
barred witnesses from “stat[ing] their conclusions on” any
“ultimate issue”—i.e., issues that the jury must
resolve to decide the case. United States v.
Spaulding, 293 U.S.
498, 506 (1935); see 7 J. Wigmore, Evidence §1921, p. 18
(3d ed. 1940) (Wigmore) (explaining that an ultimate issue is “the
exact question which the jury are required to decide” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). For example, in a medical malpractice
suit, an ultimate issue may be “whether [the] plaintiff ’s
condition resulted solely from malpractice.” De Groot v.
Winter, 261 Mich. 660, 671, 247 N.W. 69 (1933). In a murder
case, by way of comparison, an ultimate issue may be who fired the
gun that killed the victim. See State v. Carr, 196
N. C. 129, 131–132, 144 S.E. 698, 700 (1928). Under the
common-law rule, a witness could not provide his answer to those
ultimate issues. Witnesses remained free, however, to offer related
testimony, even testimony that directly helped the jury resolve an
ultimate issue. See, e.g., Furlong v.
Carraher, 108 Iowa 492, 495, 79 N.W. 277, 278 (1899)
(holding that witness could not testify about deceased’s mental
capacity to enter will, but could testify to her “condition of
. . . mind at the time the will was executed”); De
Groot, 261 Mich., at 671, 247 N. W., at 69 (holding that
witness could testify that plaintiff ’s condition could have
resulted from malpractice); Hill v. State, 134 Tex.
Crim. 163, 169, 114 S.W.2d 1180, 1183 (1938) (holding that witness
could testify in a murder case on how “the bruises and wounds on
the deceased’s body could have been caused”).

															The logic underpinning the ultimate-issue rule
was that it prevented witnesses from taking over the jury’s role.
See 1 K. Broun, McCormick on Evidence 80 (7th ed. 2013) (McCormick)
(explaining that the rule’s “stated justification” was to exclude
testimony that “usurps the function” or “invades the province of
the jury” (internal quotation marks and footnote omitted)). If a
witness gave an opinion “covering the very question which was to be
settled by the jury,” some feared that the jury would be left with
“no other duty but that of recording the finding of [the]
witnes[s].” Chicago & Alton R. Co. v. Springfield
& N. W. R. Co., 67 Ill. 142, 145 (1873).

															Although the ultimate-issue rule’s exact origins
are unclear, legal scholars agree that several States had adopted
it by the late 1800s. See W. Stoebuck, Opinions on Ultimate Facts:
Status, Trends, and a Note of Caution, 41 Denver L. Ctr. J. 226,
226–227 (1964) (Stoebuck) (“The mist the gods drew about them on
the battlefield before Troy was no more dense than the one
enshrouding the origins of the [ultimate-issue] rule”). The rule
was short lived though, and courts and commentators came to doubt
its propriety within a matter of decades. See ibid. Many
rejected the idea that ultimate-issue testimony usurps the jury’s
role, since a witness’s “credibility” and “the soundness of his
judgment” “always remain for the jury’s determination.”
Goldfoot v. Lofgren, 135 Ore. 533, 541, 296 P. 843,
847 (1931). Others labeled the rule “impracticable and
misconceived” because it excluded “the most necessary testimony” on
issues where “the jury should have help if it is needed.” 7 Wigmore
18–19. By the 1940s, “a trend [had] emerged to abandon” the rule
altogether. 1 McCormick 80. It soon became unclear whether, and to
what extent, the ultimate-issue rule carried any force. See
Stoebuck 236.

															Rule 704 made clear that the ultimate-issue rule
did not apply in federal courts. When Rule 704 was originally
adopted in 1975, it had no exceptions: All ultimate-issue opinions
were permitted. 88Stat. 1937.

															About nine years later, in the wake of the John
Hinckley, Jr., trial, Congress created the exception now found in
Rule 704(b). On March 30, 1981, Hinckley attempted to assassinate
President Ronald Reagan, shooting and wounding the President and
three other men. See L. Caplan, The Insanity Defense and the Trial
of John W. Hinckley, Jr. 7–9 (1984). At his criminal trial,
Hinckley claimed that he was insane. Both the prosecution and
defense offered competing expert opinions on the ultimate issue of
Hinckley’s sanity. See R. Bonnie, J. Jeffries, & P. Low, A Case
Study in the Insanity Defense 54 (4th ed. 2021). To the surprise of
many, Hinckley was found not guilty by reason of insanity. See
id., at 133; R. Slovenko, The Insanity Defense in the Wake
of the Hinckley Trial, 14 Rutgers L. J. 373 (1982). Congress
adopted Rule 704(b) shortly thereafter to carve out an “exception”
to Rule 704’s blanket rule admitting ultimate-issue opinions. As
Rule 704(b) now reads, “[i]n a criminal case, an expert witness
must not state an opinion about whether the defendant did or did
not have a mental state or condition that constitutes an element of
the crime charged or of a defense.”

															By its terms, Rule 704(b)’s exception covers a
narrow set of opinions. The exception does not apply in civil cases
or affect lay witness testimony. And, it exclusively addresses
mental states and conditions that are “element[s] of the crime
charged or of a defense.” Rule 704(b) thus proscribes only expert
opinions in a criminal case that are about a particular person
(“the defendant”) and a particular ultimate issue (whether the
defendant has “a mental state or condition” that is “an element of
the crime charged or of a defense”).

															III

															Rule 704(b) applies only to opinions about the
defendant. Because Agent Flood did not express an opinion about
whether Diaz herself knowingly transported methamphetamine, his
testimony did not violate Rule 704(b).

															Agent Flood instead testified about the
knowledge of most drug couriers. Specifically, he explained
that “in most circumstances, the driver knows they are hired
. . . to take the drugs from point A to point B.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 15a. That opinion does not necessarily describe
Diaz’s mental state. After all, Diaz may or may not be like most
drug couriers. Diaz herself made this point at trial. She argued
that another person, an alleged boyfriend, had deceived her into
carrying the drugs.[2] During
opening statements, Diaz’s counsel explained that Diaz met her
boyfriend while she was “broken-hearted over the death of her
mother” and recovering from “a debilitating back injury.” Trial
Tr., ECF Doc. 112, pp. 140–141. Diaz’s boyfriend “took
advantage” of those circumstances to lure Diaz to Mexico.
Id., at 140. As her counsel described it, the boyfriend then
loaned Diaz a car that was secretly loaded with drugs for her drive
back to the United States. Diaz supported that story during her
case in chief. She presented an automobile mechanics expert who
testified that there was “no way for someone to suspect or know
that there was drugs hidden within th[e] car.” Trial Tr., ECF Doc.
113, p. 62. Diaz also challenged the Government’s contrary
theory. On cross-examination, Diaz’s counsel highlighted that Agent
Flood was not involved in Diaz’s case and that the Government
itself was aware of cases involving unknowing couriers.

															The jury was thus well aware that unknowing
couriers exist and that there was evidence to suggest Diaz could be
one of them. It simply concluded that the evidence as a whole
pointed to a different conclusion: that Diaz knowingly transported
the drugs. The jury alone drew that conclusion. While Agent Flood
provided evidence to support one theory, his testimony was just
that—evidence for the jury to consider or reject when deciding
whether Diaz in fact knew about the drugs in her car. Because Agent
Flood did not give an opinion “about whether” Diaz herself “did or
did not have a mental state or condition that constitutes an
element of the crime charged or of a defense,” his testimony did
not violate Rule 704(b).

															Diaz’s counterarguments, echoed by the dissent,
are not persuasive. Diaz and the dissent argue that Agent Flood
“functional[ly]” stated an opinion about whether Diaz knowingly
transported drugs when he opined that couriers generally transport
drugs knowingly. Brief for Petitioner 24 (internal quotation marks
omitted); see also post, at 7–8 (opinion of Gorsuch, J.).
That argument mistakenly conflates an opinion about most
couriers with one about all couriers. A hypothetical helps
explain why this distinction matters under Rule 704(b). Take for
example an expert who testifies at an arson trial that all people
in the defendant’s shoes set fires maliciously (the mental state
required for common-law arson). Although the expert never spoke the
defendant’s name, the expert nonetheless violated Rule 704(b). That
is because the expert concluded that the defendant was part of a
group of people that all have a particular mental state. The phrase
“all people in the defendant’s shoes” includes, of course, the
defendant himself. So, when the expert testified that all people in
the defendant’s shoes always set fires with malicious intent, the
expert also opined that the defendant had that mental state. The
expert thus stated an opinion on the defendant’s mental state, an
ultimate issue reserved for the jury, in violation of Rule
704(b).

															Here, by contrast, Agent Flood asserted that
Diaz was part of a group of persons that may or may not have
a particular mental state. Of all drug couriers—a group that
includes Diaz—he opined that the majority knowingly transport
drugs. The jury was then left to decide: Is Diaz like the majority
of couriers? Or, is Diaz one of the
less-numerous-but-still-existent couriers who unwittingly transport
drugs? The ultimate issue of Diaz’s mental state was left to the
jury’s judgment. As a result, Agent Flood’s testimony did not
violate Rule 704(b).

															Diaz and the dissent next zero in on the word
“about” in Rule 704(b). They rely on dictionary definitions of
“about” to argue that Rule 704(b)’s prohibition includes all
testimony that “ ‘concerns’ or is ‘in reference to’ whether
the defendant possessed a particular state of mind.” Brief for
Petitioner 18–19; post, at 6–7. But, a word’s meaning is
informed by its surrounding context. See Smith v. United
States, 508 U.S.
223, 233 (1993). A crucial part of that context is the other
words in the sentence. See FCC v. AT&T Inc.,
562 U.S.
397, 405 (2011). The words surrounding “about” make clear that
Rule 704(b) addresses a far narrower category of testimony than
Diaz and the dissent posit. To begin, the Rule targets
“opinion[s].” In other words, the testimony must be more than a
general reference, and it must reach a particular conclusion. See
Black’s Law Dictionary 1244 (rev. 4th ed. 1968) (defining opinion
evidence as “what the witness thinks, believes, or infers in regard
to facts in dispute”). Moreover, the Rule does not preclude
testimony “about” mental-state ultimate issues in the abstract.
Instead, it targets conclusions “about whether” a certain fact is
true: “[T]he defendant did or did not have a mental state or
condition.” The language as a whole thus conveys that Rule 704(b)
is limited to conclusions as to the defendant’s mental state.

															Rule 704(a) further confirms the narrow scope of
testimony prohibited by Rule 704(b). Recall that the original
ultimate-issue rule excluded opinions on the ultimate issue itself.
See supra, at 4–5. Rule 704(a) abolished that practice by
permitting testimony that “embraces an ultimate issue.” See 5
Oxford English Dictionary 169 (2d ed. 1989) (defining “embrace” as
“[t]o include, contain, comprise”). Because Rule 704(b) is an
“exception” to Rule 704(a), it can only be understood to cover a
subset of the testimony that Rule 704(a) expressly allows. In
short, since Rule 704(a) permits opinion testimony that includes
ultimate issues, Rule 704(b) must exclude only a subset of those
same opinions.

															The reading offered by Diaz and the dissent
would have the exception swallow the rule. If Rule 704(b) were as
broad as they suggest, it would be a standalone prohibition broader
than Rule 704(a)—or even the original ultimate-issue rule. Even
though the ultimate-issue rule and Rule 704(a) address opinions
that include the ultimate issue itself, Rule 704(b) would prohibit
all opinions even related to the ultimate issue of a defendant’s
mental state. Rule 704’s text does not support such an expansion.
The Rule as a whole makes clear that an opinion is “about” the
ultimate issue of the defendant’s mental state only if it includes
a conclusion on that precise topic, not merely if it concerns or
refers to that topic.

															IV

															An expert’s conclusion that “most people” in a
group have a particular mental state is not an opinion about “the
defendant” and thus does not violate Rule 704(b). Accordingly, the
judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 Between her conviction
and sentencing, Diaz confessed that she had fabricated the
boyfriend story. She also admitted that she had previously smuggled
drugs into the United States and had volunteered to make the drug
run that led to her arrest.
2
 Though Diaz later
admitted the boyfriend never existed, she maintained her story
throughout the trial. N. 1, supra.


