::decision_cite:: 23-175
::decision_name::  City of Grants Pass v. Johnson
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–175

															_________________

															CITY OF GRANTS PASS, OREGON, PETITIONER
v. Gloria Johnson, et al., on behalf of themselves and
all others similarly situated

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															Justice Thomas, concurring.

															I join the Court’s opinion in full because it
correctly rejects the respondents’ claims under the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause. As the Court observes, that Clause
“focuses on the question what method or kind of punishment a
government may impose after a criminal conviction.” Ante, at
16 (internal quotation marks omitted). The respondents, by
contrast, ask whether Grants Pass “may criminalize particular
behavior in the first place.” Ibid. I write separately to
make two additional observations about the respondents’ claims.

															First, the precedent that the respondents
primarily rely upon, Robinson v. California,
370 U.S.
660 (1962), was wrongly decided. In Robinson, the Court
held that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause prohibits the
enforcement of laws criminalizing a person’s status. Id., at
666. That holding conflicts with the plain text and history of the
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. See ante, at 15–16.
That fact is unsurprising given that the Robinson Court made
no attempt to analyze the Eighth Amendment’s text or discern its
original meaning. Instead, Robinson’s holding rested almost
entirely on the Court’s understanding of public opinion: The
Robinson Court observed that “in the light of contemporary
human knowledge, a law which made a criminal offense of
. . . a disease [such as narcotics addiction] would
doubtless be universally thought to be an infliction of cruel and
unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth
Amendments.” 370 U. S., at 666. Modern public opinion is not
an appropriate metric for interpreting the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause—or any provision of the Constitution for that
matter.

															Much of the Court’s other Eighth Amendment
precedents make the same mistake. Rather than interpret our written
Constitution, the Court has at times “proclaim[ed] itself sole
arbiter of our Nation’s moral standards,” Roper v.
Simmons, 543 U.S.
551, 608 (2005) (Scalia, J., dissenting), and has set out to
enforce “evolving standards of decency,” Trop v.
Dulles, 356 U.S.
86, 101 (1958) (plurality opinion). “In a system based upon
constitutional and statutory text democratically adopted, the
concept of ‘law’ ordinarily signifies that particular words have a
fixed meaning.” Roper, 543 U. S., at 629 (opinion of
Scalia, J.). I continue to believe that we should adhere to the
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause’s fixed meaning in resolving
any challenge brought under it.

															To be sure, we need not reconsider
Robinson to resolve this case. As the Court explains, the
challenged ordinances regulate conduct, not status, and thus do not
implicate Robinson. Ante, at 20–21. Moreover, it is
unclear what, if any, weight Robinson carries. The Court has
not once applied Robinson’s interpretation of the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause. And, today the Court rightly questions
the decision’s “persuasive force.” Ante, at 20. Still,
rather than let Robinson’s erroneous holding linger in the
background of our Eighth Amendment jurisprudence, we should dispose
of it once and for all. In an appropriate case, the Court should
certainly correct this error.

															Second, the respondents have not established
that their claims implicate the Cruel and Unusual Punishments
Clause in the first place. The challenged ordinances are enforced
through the imposition of civil fines and civil park exclusion
orders, as well as through criminal trespass charges. But, “[a]t
the time the Eighth Amendment was ratified, the word ‘punishment’
referred to the penalty imposed for the commission of a crime.”
Helling v. McKinney, 509 U.S.
25, 38 (1993) (Thomas, J., dissenting); see ante, at
15–16. The respondents have yet to explain how the civil fines and
park exclusion orders constitute a “penalty imposed for the
commission of a crime.” Helling, 509 U. S., at 38.

															For its part, the Court of Appeals concluded
that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause governs these civil
penalties because they can “later . . . become criminal
offenses.” 72 F. 4th 868, 890 (CA9 2023). But, that theory
rests on layer upon layer of speculation. It requires reasoning
that because violating one of the ordinances “could result
in civil citations and fines, [and] repeat violators could
be excluded from specified City property, and . . .
violating an exclusion order could subject a violator to
criminal trespass prosecution,” civil fines and park exclusion
orders therefore must be governed by the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause. Id., at 926 (O’Scannlain, J., statement
respecting denial of rehearing en banc) (emphasis added). And, if
this case is any indication, the possibility that a civil fine
turns into a criminal trespass charge is a remote one. The
respondents assert that they have been involuntarily homeless in
Grants Pass for years, yet they have never received a park
exclusion order, much less a criminal trespass charge. See
ante, at 11.

															Because the respondents’ claims fail either way,
the Court does not address the merits of the Court of Appeals’
theory. See ante, at 16–17, and n. 4. Suffice it to say, we
have never endorsed such a broad view of the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause. Both this Court and lower courts should be wary
of expanding the Clause beyond its text and original meaning.

													
