::decision_cite:: 23-175
::decision_name::  City of Grants Pass v. Johnson
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–175

															_________________

															CITY OF GRANTS PASS, OREGON, PETITIONER
v. Gloria Johnson, et al., on behalf of themselves and
all others similarly situated

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															

															Justice Gorsuch delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Many cities across the American West face a
homelessness crisis. The causes are varied and complex, the
appropriate public policy responses perhaps no less so. Like many
local governments, the city of Grants Pass, Oregon, has pursued a
multifaceted approach. Recently, it adopted various policies aimed
at “protecting the rights, dignity[,] and private property of the
homeless.” App. 152. It appointed a “homeless community liaison”
officer charged with ensuring the homeless receive information
about “assistance programs and other resources” available to them
through the city and its local shelter. Id., at 152–153;
Brief for Grants Pass Gospel Rescue Mission as Amicus Curiae
2–3. And it adopted certain restrictions against encampments on
public property. App. 155–156. The Ninth Circuit, however, held
that the Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause
barred that last measure. With support from States and cities
across the country, Grants Pass urged this Court to review the
Ninth Circuit’s decision. We take up that task now.

															I

															A

															Some suggest that homelessness may be the
“defining public health and safety crisis in the western United
States” today. 72 F. 4th 868, 934 (CA9 2023) (Smith, J.,
dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc). According to the
federal government, homelessness in this country has reached its
highest levels since the government began reporting data on the
subject in 2007. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, Office of
Community Planning & Development, T. de Sousa et al., The
2023 Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress 2–3
(2023). California alone is home to around half of those in this
Nation living without shelter on a given night. Id., at 30.
And each of the five States with the highest rates of unsheltered
homelessness in the country—California, Oregon, Hawaii, Arizona,
and Nevada—lies in the American West. Id., at 17.

															Those experiencing homelessness may be as
diverse as the Nation itself—they are young and old and belong to
all races and creeds. People become homeless for a variety of
reasons, too, many beyond their control. Some have been affected by
economic conditions, rising housing costs, or natural disasters.
Id., at 37; see Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 2–3. Some have been forced from their homes to escape
domestic violence and other forms of exploitation. Ibid. And
still others struggle with drug addiction and mental illness. By
one estimate, perhaps 78 percent of the unsheltered suffer from
mental-health issues, while 75 percent struggle with substance
abuse. See J. Rountree, N. Hess, & A. Lyke, Health Conditions
Among Unsheltered Adults in the U. S., Calif. Policy Lab,
Policy Brief 5 (2019).

															Those living without shelter often live
together. L. Dunton et al., Dept. of Housing and Urban
Development, Office of Policy Development & Research, Exploring
Homelessness Among People Living in Encampments and Associated Cost
1 (2020) (2020 HUD Report). As the number of homeless individuals
has grown, the number of homeless encampments across the country
has increased as well, “in numbers not seen in almost a century.”
Ibid. The unsheltered may coalesce in these encampments for
a range of reasons. Some value the “freedom” encampment living
provides compared with submitting to the rules shelters impose.
Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy
Development and Research, R. Cohen, W. Yetvin, & J. Khadduri,
Understanding Encampments of People Experiencing Homelessness and
Community Responses 5 (2019). Others report that encampments offer
a “sense of community.” Id., at 7. And still others
may seek them out for “dependable access to illegal drugs.”
Ibid. In brief, the reasons why someone will go without
shelter on a given night vary widely by the person and by the day.
See ibid.

															As the number and size of these encampments have
grown, so have the challenges they can pose for the homeless and
others. We are told, for example, that the “exponential increase in
. . . encampments in recent years has resulted in an
increase in crimes both against the homeless and by the homeless.”
Brief for California State Sheriffs’ Associations et al. as
Amici Curiae 21 (California Sheriffs Brief ).
California’s Governor reports that encampment inhabitants face
heightened risks of “sexual assault” and “subjugation to sex work.”
Brief for California Governor G. Newsom as Amicus Curiae 11
(California Governor Brief ). And by one estimate, more than
40 percent of the shootings in Seattle in early 2022 were linked to
homeless encampments. Brief for Washington State Association of
Sheriffs and Police Chiefs as Amicus Curiae on Pet. for
Cert. 10 (Washington Sheriffs Brief ).

															Other challenges have arisen as well. Some city
officials indicate that encampments facilitate the distribution of
drugs like heroin and fentanyl, which have claimed the lives of so
many Americans in recent years. Brief for Office of the San Diego
County District Attorney as Amicus Curiae 17–19. Without
running water or proper sanitation facilities, too, diseases can
sometimes spread in encampments and beyond them. Various States say
that they have seen typhus, shigella, trench fever, and other
diseases reemerge on their city streets. California Governor Brief
12; Brief for Idaho et al. as Amici Curiae 7 (States
Brief ).

															Nor do problems like these affect everyone
equally. Often, encampments are found in a city’s “poorest and most
vulnerable neighborhoods.” Brief for City and County of San
Francisco et al. as Amici Curiae on Pet. for Cert. 5
(San Francisco Cert. Brief ); see also 2020 HUD Report 9. With
encampments dotting neighborhood sidewalks, adults and children in
these communities are sometimes forced to navigate around used
needles, human waste, and other hazards to make their way to
school, the grocery store, or work. San Francisco Cert. Brief 5;
States Brief 8; California Governor Brief 11–12. Those with
physical disabilities report this can pose a special challenge for
them, as they may lack the mobility to maneuver safely around the
encampments. San Francisco Cert. Brief 5; see also Brief for Tiana
Tozer et al. as Amici Curiae 1–6 (Tozer
Brief ).

															Communities of all sizes are grappling with how
best to address challenges like these. As they have throughout the
Nation’s history, charitable organizations “serve as the backbone
of the emergency shelter system in this country,” accounting for
roughly 40 percent of the country’s shelter beds for single adults
on a given night. See National Alliance To End Homelessness,
Faith-Based Organizations: Fundamental Partners in Ending
Homelessness 1 (2017). Many private organizations, city officials,
and States have worked, as well, to increase the availability of
affordable housing in order to provide more permanent shelter for
those in need. See Brief for Local Government Legal Center
et al. as Amici Curiae 4, 32 (Cities Brief ). But
many, too, have come to the conclusion that, as they put it,
“[j]ust building more shelter beds and public housing options is
almost certainly not the answer by itself.” Id., at 11.

															As many cities see it, even as they have
expanded shelter capacity and other public services, their
unsheltered populations have continued to grow. Id., at
9–11. The city of Seattle, for example, reports that roughly 60
percent of its offers of shelter have been rejected in a recent
year. See id., at 28, and n. 26. Officials in Portland,
Oregon, indicate that, between April 2022 and January 2024, over 70
percent of their approximately 3,500 offers of shelter beds to
homeless individuals were declined. Brief for League of Oregon
Cities et al. as Amici Curiae 5 (Oregon Cities
Brief ). Other cities tell us that “the vast majority of their
homeless populations are not actively seeking shelter and refuse
all services.” Brief for Thirteen California Cities as Amici
Curiae 3. Surveys cited by the Department of Justice suggest
that only “25–41 percent” of “homeless encampment residents”
“willingly” accept offers of shelter beds. See Dept. of Justice,
Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, S. Chamard,
Homeless Encampments 36 (2010).

															The reasons why the unsheltered sometimes reject
offers of assistance may themselves be many and complex. Some may
reject shelter because accepting it would take them further from
family and local ties. See Brief for 57 Social Scientists as
Amici Curiae 20. Some may decline offers of assistance
because of concerns for their safety or the rules some shelters
impose regarding curfews, drug use, or religious practices.
Id., at 22; see Cities Brief 29. Other factors may also be
at play. But whatever the causes, local governments say, this
dynamic significantly complicates their efforts to address the
challenges of homelessness. See id., at 11.

															Rather than focus on a single policy to meet the
challenges associated with homelessness, many States and cities
have pursued a range of policies and programs. See 2020 HUD Report
14–20. Beyond expanding shelter and affordable housing
opportunities, some have reinvested in mental-health and
substance-abuse treatment programs. See Brief for California State
Association of Counties et al. as Amici Curiae 20, 25;
see also 2020 HUD Report 23. Some have trained their employees in
outreach tactics designed to improve relations between governments
and the homeless they serve. Ibid. And still others have
chosen to pair these efforts with the enforcement of laws that
restrict camping in public places, like parks, streets, and
sidewalks. Cities Brief 11.

															Laws like those are commonplace. By one count,
“a majority of cities have laws restricting camping in public
spaces,” and nearly forty percent “have one or more laws
prohibiting camping citywide.” See Brief for Western Regional
Advocacy Project as Amicus Curiae 7, n. 15 (emphasis
deleted). Some have argued that the enforcement of these laws can
create a “revolving door that circulates individuals experiencing
homelessness from the street to the criminal justice system and
back.” U. S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, Searching
Out Solutions 6 (2012). But many cities take a different view.
According to the National League of Cities (a group that represents
more than 19,000 American cities and towns), the National
Association of Counties (which represents the Nation’s 3,069
counties) and others across the American West, these public-camping
regulations are not usually deployed as a front-line response “to
criminalize homelessness.” Cities Brief 11. Instead, they are used
to provide city employees with the legal authority to address
“encampments that pose significant health and safety risks” and to
encourage their inhabitants to accept other alternatives like
shelters, drug treatment programs, and mental-health facilities.
Ibid.

															Cities are not alone in pursuing this approach.
The federal government also restricts “the storage of
. . . sleeping bags,” as well as other “sleeping
activities,” on park lands. 36 CFR §§7.96(i), (j)(1) (2023). And
it, too, has exercised that authority to clear certain “dangerous”
encampments. National Park Service, Record of Determination for
Clearing the Unsheltered Encampment at McPherson Square and
Temporary Park Closure for Rehabilitation (Feb. 13, 2023).

															Different governments may use these laws in
different ways and to varying degrees. See Cities Brief 11. But
many broadly agree that “policymakers need access to the full
panoply of tools in the policy toolbox” to “tackle the complicated
issues of housing and homelessness.” California Governor Brief 16;
accord, Cities Brief 11; Oregon Cities Brief 17.

															B

															Five years ago, the U. S. Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit took one of those tools off the
table. In Martin v. Boise, 920 F.3d 584 (2019), that
court considered a public-camping ordinance in Boise, Idaho, that
made it a misdemeanor to use “streets, sidewalks, parks, or public
places” for “camping.” Id., at 603 (internal quotation marks
omitted). According to the Ninth Circuit, the Eighth Amendment’s
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause barred Boise from enforcing
its public-camping ordinance against homeless individuals who
lacked “access to alternative shelter.” Id., at 615. That
“access” was lacking, the court said, whenever “ ‘there is a
greater number of homeless individuals in a jurisdiction than the
number of available beds in shelters.’ ” Id., at 617
(alterations omitted). According to the Ninth Circuit, nearly three
quarters of Boise’s shelter beds were not “practically available”
because the city’s charitable shelters had a “religious
atmosphere.” Id., at 609–610, 618. Boise was thus enjoined
from enforcing its camping laws against the plaintiffs.
Ibid.

															No other circuit has followed Martin’s
lead with respect to public-camping laws. Nor did the decision go
unremarked within the Ninth Circuit. When the full court denied
rehearing en banc, several judges wrote separately to note their
dissent. In one statement, Judge Bennett argued that Martin
was inconsistent with the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause.
That provision, Judge Bennett contended, prohibits certain methods
of punishment a government may impose after a criminal conviction,
but it does not “impose [any] substantive limits on what conduct a
state may criminalize.” 920 F. 3d, at 599–602. In another
statement, Judge Smith lamented that Martin had “shackle[d]
the hands of public officials trying to redress the serious
societal concern of homelessness.” Id., at 590. He predicted
the decision would “wrea[k] havoc on local governments, residents,
and businesses” across the American West. Ibid.

															After Martin, similar suits proliferated
against Western cities within the Ninth Circuit. As Judge Smith put
it, “[i]f one picks up a map of the western United States and
points to a city that appears on it, there is a good chance that
city has already faced” a judicial injunction based on
Martin or the threat of one “in the few short years since
[the Ninth Circuit] initiated its Martin experiment.” 72
F. 4th, at 940; see, e.g., Boyd v. San
Rafael, 2023 WL 7283885, *1–*2 (ND Cal., Nov. 2, 2023); Fund
for Empowerment v. Phoenix, 646 F. Supp. 3d 1117,
1132 (Ariz. 2022); Warren v. Chico, 2021 WL 2894648,
*3 (ED Cal., July 8, 2021).

															Consider San Francisco, where each night
thousands sleep “in tents and other makeshift structures.” Brief
for City and County of San Francisco et al. as Amici
Curiae 8 (San Francisco Brief ). Applying Martin, a
district court entered an injunction barring the city from
enforcing “laws and ordinances to prohibit involuntarily homeless
individuals from sitting, lying, or sleeping on public property.”
Coalition on Homelessness v. San Francisco, 647
F. Supp. 3d 806, 841 (ND Cal. 2022). That “misapplication of
this Court’s Eighth Amendment precedents,” the Mayor tells us, has
“severely constrained San Francisco’s ability to address the
homelessness crisis.” San Francisco Brief 7. The city “uses
enforcement of its laws prohibiting camping” not to criminalize
homelessness, but “as one important tool among others to encourage
individuals experiencing homelessness to accept services and to
help ensure safe and accessible sidewalks and public spaces.”
Id., at 7–8. Judicial intervention restricting the use of
that tool, the Mayor continues, “has led to painful results on the
streets and in neighborhoods.” Id., at 8. “San Francisco has
seen over half of its offers of shelter and services rejected by
unhoused individuals, who often cite” the Martin order
against the city “as their justification to permanently occupy and
block public sidewalks.” Id., at 8–9.

															An exceptionally large number of cities and
States have filed briefs in this Court reporting experiences like
San Francisco’s. In the judgment of many of them, the Ninth Circuit
has inappropriately “limit[ed] the tools available to local
governments for tackling [what is a] complex and difficult human
issue.” Oregon Cities Brief 2. The threat of Martin
injunctions, they say, has “paralyze[d]” even commonsense and
good-faith efforts at addressing homelessness. Brief for City of
Phoenix et al. as Amici Curiae 36 (Phoenix
Brief ). The Ninth Circuit’s intervention, they insist, has
prevented local governments from pursuing “effective solutions to
this humanitarian crisis while simultaneously protecting the
remaining community’s right to safely enjoy public spaces.” Brief
for International Municipal Lawyers Association et al. as
Amici Curiae on Pet. for Cert. 27 (Cities Cert.
Brief ); States Brief 11 (“State and local governments in the
Ninth Circuit have attempted a variety of solutions to address the
problems that public encampments inflict on their communities,”
only to have those “efforts . . . shut down by federal
courts”).

															Many cities further report that, rather than
help alleviate the homelessness crisis, Martin injunctions
have inadvertently contributed to it. The numbers of “[u]nsheltered
homelessness,” they represent, have “increased dramatically in the
Ninth Circuit since Martin.” Brief for League of Oregon
Cities et al. as Amici Curiae on Pet. for Cert. 7
(boldface and capitalization deleted). And, they say, Martin
injunctions have contributed to this trend by “weaken[ing]” the
ability of public officials “to persuade persons experiencing
homelessness to accept shelter beds and [other] services.” Brief
for Ten California Cities as Amici Curiae on Pet. for Cert.
2. In Portland, for example, residents report some unsheltered
persons “often return within days” of an encampment’s clearing, on
the understanding that “Martin . . . and its
progeny prohibit the [c]ity from implementing more efficacious
strategies.” Tozer Brief 5; Washington Sheriffs Brief 14
(Martin divests officers of the “ability to compel
[unsheltered] persons to leave encampments and obtain necessary
services”). In short, they say, Martin “make[s] solving this
crisis harder.” Cities Cert. Brief 3.

															All acknowledge “[h]omelessness is a complex and
serious social issue that cries out for effective . . .
responses.” Ibid. But many States and cities believe “it is
crucial” for local governments to “have the latitude” to experiment
and find effective responses. Id., at 27; States Brief
13–17. “Injunctions and the threat of federal litigation,” they
insist, “impede this democratic process,” undermine local
governments, and do not well serve the homeless or others who live
in the Ninth Circuit. Cities Cert. Brief 27–28.

															C

															The case before us arises from a Martin
injunction issued against the city of Grants Pass. Located on the
banks of the Rogue River in southwestern Oregon, the city is home
to roughly 38,000 people. Among them are an estimated 600
individuals who experience homelessness on a given day. 72
F. 4th, at 874; App. to Pet. for Cert. 167a–168a;
212a–213a.

															Like many American cities, Grants Pass has laws
restricting camping in public spaces. Three are relevant here. The
first prohibits sleeping “on public sidewalks, streets, or
alleyways.” Grants Pass Municipal Code §5.61.020(A) (2023); App. to
Pet. for Cert. 221a. The second prohibits “[c]amping” on public
property. §5.61.030; App. to Pet. for Cert. 222a (boldface
deleted). Camping is defined as “set[ting] up . . . or
remain[ing] in or at a campsite,” and a “[c]ampsite” is defined as
“any place where bedding, sleeping bag[s], or other material used
for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed
. . . for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to
live.” §§5.61.010(A)–(B); App. to Pet. for Cert. 221a. The third
prohibits “[c]amping” and “[o]vernight parking” in the city’s
parks. §§6.46.090(A)–(B); 72 F. 4th, at 876. Penalties for
violating these ordinances escalate stepwise. An initial violation
may trigger a fine. §§1.36.010(I)–(J). Those who receive multiple
citations may be subject to an order barring them from city parks
for 30 days. §6.46.350; App. to Pet. for Cert. 174a. And, in turn,
violations of those orders can constitute criminal trespass,
punishable by a maximum of 30 days in prison and a $1,250 fine.
Ore. Rev. Stat. §§164.245, 161.615(3), 161.635(1)(c) (2023).

															Neither of the named plaintiffs before us has
been subjected to an order barring them from city property or to
criminal trespass charges. Perhaps that is because the city has
traditionally taken a light-touch approach to enforcement. The
city’s officers are directed “to provide law enforcement services
to all members of the community while protecting the rights,
dignity[,] and private property of the homeless.” App. 152, Grants
Pass Dept. of Public Safety Policy Manual ¶428.1.1 (Dec. 17, 2018).
Officers are instructed that “[h]omelessness is not a crime.”
Ibid. And they are “encouraged” to render “aid” and
“support” to the homeless whenever possible. Id., at 153,
¶428.3.[1]

															Still, shortly after the panel decision in
Martin, two homeless individuals, Gloria Johnson and John
Logan, filed suit challenging the city’s public-camping laws. App.
37, Third Amended Complaint ¶¶6–7. They claimed, among other
things, that the city’s ordinances violated the Eighth Amendment’s
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. Id., at 51, ¶66. And
they sought to pursue their claim on behalf of a class encompassing
“all involuntarily homeless people living in Grants Pass.”
Id., at 48, ¶52.[2]

															The district court certified the class action
and enjoined the city from enforcing its public-camping laws
against the homeless. While Ms. Johnson and Mr. Logan generally
sleep in their vehicles, the court held, they could adequately
represent the class, for sleeping in a vehicle can sometimes count
as unlawful “ ‘camping’ ” under the relevant ordinances.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 219a (quoting Grants Pass Municipal Code
§5.61.010). And, the court found, everyone without shelter in
Grants Pass was “involuntarily homeless” because the city’s total
homeless population outnumbered its “ ‘practically
available’ ” shelter beds. App. to Pet. for Cert. 179a, 216a.
In fact, the court ruled, none of the beds at Grants Pass’s
charity-run shelter qualified as “available.” They did not, the
court said, both because that shelter offers something closer to
transitional housing than “temporary emergency shelter,” and
because the shelter has rules requiring residents to abstain from
smoking and attend religious services. Id., at 179a–180a.
The Eighth Amendment, the district court thus concluded, prohibited
Grants Pass from enforcing its laws against homeless individuals in
the city. Id., at 182a–183a.

															A divided panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed in
relevant part. 72 F. 4th, at 874–896. The majority agreed with
the district court that all unsheltered individuals in Grants Pass
qualify as “involuntarily homeless” because the city’s homeless
population exceeds “available” shelter beds. Id., at 894.
And the majority further agreed that, under Martin, the
homeless there cannot be punished for camping with “rudimentary
forms of protection from the elements.” 72 F. 4th, at 896. In
dissent, Judge Collins questioned Martin’s consistency with
the Eighth Amendment and lamented its “dire practical consequences”
for the city and others like it. 72 F. 4th, at 914 (internal
quotation marks omitted).

															The city sought rehearing en banc, which the
court denied over the objection of 17 judges who joined five
separate opinions. Id., at 869, 924–945. Judge O’Scannlain,
joined by 14 judges, criticized Martin’s “jurisprudential
experiment” as “egregiously flawed and deeply damaging—at war with
the constitutional text, history, and tradition.” 72 F. 4th,
at 925, 926, n. 2. Judge Bress, joined by 11 judges, contended
that Martin has “add[ed] enormous and unjustified
complication to an already extremely complicated set of
circumstances.” 72 F. 4th, at 945. And Judge Smith, joined by
several others, described in painstaking detail the ways in which,
in his view, Martin had thwarted good-faith attempts by
cities across the West, from Phoenix to Sacramento, to address
homelessness. 72 F. 4th, at 934, 940–943.

															Grants Pass filed a petition for certiorari. A
large number of States, cities, and counties from across the Ninth
Circuit and the country joined Grants Pass in urging the Court to
grant review to assess the Martin experiment. See Part I–B,
supra. We agreed to do so. 601 U. S. ___
(2024).[3]

															II

															A

															The Constitution and its Amendments impose a
number of limits on what governments in this country may declare to
be criminal behavior and how they may go about enforcing their
criminal laws. Familiarly, the First Amendment prohibits
governments from using their criminal laws to abridge the rights to
speak, worship, assemble, petition, and exercise the freedom of the
press. The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
prevents governments from adopting laws that invidiously
discriminate between persons. The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth
and Fourteenth Amendments ensure that officials may not displace
certain rules associated with criminal liability that are “so old
and venerable,” “ ‘so rooted in the traditions and conscience
of our people[,] as to be ranked as fundamental.’ ”
Kahler v. Kansas, 589 U.S. 271, 279 (2020) (quoting
Leland v. Oregon, 343 U.S.
790, 798 (1952)). The Fifth and Sixth Amendments require
prosecutors and courts to observe various procedures before denying
any person of his liberty, promising for example that every person
enjoys the right to confront his accusers and have serious criminal
charges resolved by a jury of his peers. One could go on.

															But if many other constitutional provisions
address what a government may criminalize and how it may go about
securing a conviction, the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition against
“cruel and unusual punishments” focuses on what happens next. That
Clause “has always been considered, and properly so, to be directed
at the method or kind of punishment” a government may “impos[e] for
the violation of criminal statutes.” Powell v. Texas,
392
U.S. 514, 531–532 (1968) (plurality opinion).

															We have previously discussed the Clause’s
origins and meaning. In the 18th century, English law still
“formally tolerated” certain barbaric punishments like
“disemboweling, quartering, public dissection, and burning alive,”
even though those practices had by then “fallen into disuse.”
Bucklew v. Precythe, 587 U.S. 119, 130 (2019) (citing
4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 370 (1769)
(Blackstone)). The Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause was adopted
to ensure that the new Nation would never resort to any of those
punishments or others like them. Punishments like those were
“cruel” because they were calculated to “ ‘superad[d]’ ”
“ ‘terror, pain, or disgrace.’ ” 587 U. S., at 130
(quoting 4 Blackstone 370). And they were “unusual” because, by the
time of the Amendment’s adoption, they had “long fallen out of
use.” 587 U. S., at 130. Perhaps some of those who framed our
Constitution thought, as Justice Story did, that a guarantee
against those kinds of “atrocious” punishments would prove
“unnecessary” because no “free government” would ever employ
anything like them. 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of
the United States §1896, p. 750 (1833). But in adopting the
Eighth Amendment, the framers took no chances.

															All that would seem to make the Eighth Amendment
a poor foundation on which to rest the kind of decree the
plaintiffs seek in this case and the Ninth Circuit has endorsed
since Martin. The Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause
focuses on the question what “method or kind of punishment” a
government may impose after a criminal conviction, not on the
question whether a government may criminalize particular behavior
in the first place or how it may go about securing a conviction for
that offense. Powell, 392 U. S., at 531–532. To the
extent the Constitution speaks to those other matters, it does so,
as we have seen, in other provisions.

															Nor, focusing on the criminal punishments Grant
Pass imposes, can we say they qualify as cruel and unusual. Recall
that, under the city’s ordinances, an initial offense may trigger a
civil fine. Repeat offenses may trigger an order temporarily
barring an individual from camping in a public park. Only those who
later violate an order like that may face a criminal punishment of
up to 30 days in jail and a larger fine. See Part I–C,
supra. None of the city’s sanctions qualifies as cruel
because none is designed to “superad[d]” “terror, pain, or
disgrace.” Bucklew, 587 U. S., at 130 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Nor are the city’s sanctions unusual,
because similar punishments have been and remain among “the usual
mode[s]” for punishing offenses throughout the country.
Pervear v. Commonwealth, 5 Wall. 475, 480 (1867); see
4 Blackstone 371–372; Timbs v. Indiana, 586 U.S. 146,
165 (2019) (Thomas J., concurring in judgment) (describing fines as
“ ‘the drudge-horse of criminal justice, probably the most
common form of punishment’ ” (some internal quotation marks
omitted)). In fact, large numbers of cities and States across the
country have long employed, and today employ, similar punishments
for similar offenses. See Part I–A, supra; Brief for
Professor John F. Stinneford as Amicus Curiae 7–13
(collecting historical and contemporary examples). Notably, neither
the plaintiffs nor the dissent meaningfully contests any of this.
See Brief for Respondents 40.[4]

															B

															Instead, the plaintiffs and the dissent pursue
an entirely different theory. They do not question that, by its
terms, the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause speaks to the
question what punishments may follow a criminal conviction, not to
antecedent questions like what a State may criminalize or how it
may go about securing a conviction. Yet, echoing the Ninth Circuit
in Martin, they insist one notable exception exists.

															In Robinson v. California,
370 U.S.
660 (1962), the plaintiffs and the dissent observe, this Court
addressed a challenge to a criminal conviction under a California
statute providing that “ ‘[n]o person shall . . . be
addicted to the use of narcotics.’ ” Ibid., n. 1.
In response to that challenge, the Court invoked the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause to hold that California could not
enforce its law making “the ‘status’ of narcotic addiction a
criminal offense.” Id., at 666. The Court recognized that
“imprisonment for ninety days is not, in the abstract, a punishment
which is either cruel or unusual.” Id., at 667. But, the
Court reasoned, when punishing “ ‘status,’ ” “[e]ven one
day in prison would be . . . cruel and unusual.”
Id., at 666–667.

															In doing so, the Court stressed the limits of
its decision. It would have ruled differently, the Court said, if
California had sought to convict the defendant for, say, the
knowing or intentional “use of narcotics, for their purchase, sale,
or possession, or for antisocial or disorderly behavior resulting
from their administration.” Id., at 666. In fact, the Court
took pains to emphasize that it did not mean to cast doubt on the
States’ “broad power” to prohibit behavior like that, even by
those, like the defendant, who suffered from addiction. Id.,
at 664, 667–668. The only problem, as the Court saw it, was that
California’s law did not operate that way. Instead, it made the
mere status of being an addict a crime. Id., at 666–667. And
it was that feature of the law, the Court held, that went too
far.

															Reaching that conclusion under the banner of the
Eighth Amendment may have come as a surprise to the litigants. Mr.
Robinson challenged his conviction principally on the ground that
it offended the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of due process of
law. As he saw it, California’s law violated due process because it
purported to make unlawful a “status” rather than the commission of
any “volitional act.” See Brief for Appellant in Robinson v.
California, O. T. 1961, No. 61–554, p. 13
(Robinson Brief ).

															That framing may have made some sense. Our due
process jurisprudence has long taken guidance from the “settled
usage[s] . . . in England and in this country.”
Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S.
516, 528 (1884); see also Kahler, 589 U. S., at
279. And, historically, crimes in England and this country have
usually required proof of some act (or actus reus)
undertaken with some measure of volition (mens rea). At
common law, “a complete crime” generally required “both a will and
an act.” 4 Blackstone 21. This view “took deep and early root in
American soil” where, to this day, a crime ordinarily arises “only
from concurrence of an evil-meaning mind with an evil-doing hand.”
Morissette v. United States, 342
U.S. 246, 251–252 (1952). Measured against these standards,
California’s law was an anomaly, as it required proof of neither of
those things.

															Mr. Robinson’s resort to the Eighth Amendment
was comparatively brief. He referenced it only in passing, and only
for the proposition that forcing a drug addict like himself to go
“ ‘cold turkey’ ” in a jail cell after conviction
entailed such “intense mental and physical torment” that it was
akin to “the burning of witches at the stake.” Robinson Brief 30.
The State responded to that argument with barely a paragraph of
analysis, Brief for Appellee in Robinson v.
California, O. T. 1961, No. 61–554, pp. 22–23, and
it received virtually no attention at oral argument. By almost
every indication, then, Robinson was set to be a case about
the scope of the Due Process Clause, or perhaps an Eighth Amendment
case about whether forcing an addict to withdraw from drugs after
conviction qualified as cruel and unusual punishment.

															Of course, the case turned out differently.
Bypassing Mr. Robinson’s primary Due Process Clause argument, the
Court charted its own course, reading the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause to impose a limit not just on what punishments
may follow a criminal conviction but what a State may criminalize
to begin with. It was a view unprecedented in the history of the
Court before 1962. In dissent, Justice White lamented that the
majority had embraced an “application of ‘cruel and unusual
punishment’ so novel that” it could not possibly be “ascribe[d] to
the Framers of the Constitution.” 370 U. S., at 689. Nor, in
the 62 years since Robinson, has this Court once invoked it
as authority to decline the enforcement of any criminal law,
leaving the Eighth Amendment instead to perform its traditional
function of addressing the punishments that follow a criminal
conviction.

															Still, no one has asked us to reconsider
Robinson. Nor do we see any need to do so today. Whatever
its persuasive force as an interpretation of the Eighth Amendment,
it cannot sustain the Ninth Circuit’s course since Martin.
In Robinson, the Court expressly recognized the “broad
power” States enjoy over the substance of their criminal laws,
stressing that they may criminalize knowing or intentional drug use
even by those suffering from addiction. 370 U. S., at 664,
666. The Court held only that a State may not criminalize the
“ ‘status’ ” of being an addict. Id., at 666. In
criminalizing a mere status, Robinson stressed, California
had taken a historically anomalous approach toward criminal
liability. One, in fact, this Court has not encountered since
Robinson itself.

															Public camping ordinances like those before us
are nothing like the law at issue in Robinson. Rather than
criminalize mere status, Grants Pass forbids actions like
“occupy[ing] a campsite” on public property “for the purpose of
maintaining a temporary place to live.” Grants Pass Municipal Code
§§5.61.030, 5.61.010; App. to Pet. for Cert. 221a–222a. Under the
city’s laws, it makes no difference whether the charged defendant
is homeless, a backpacker on vacation passing through town, or a
student who abandons his dorm room to camp out in protest on the
lawn of a municipal building. See Part I–C, supra;
Blake v. Grants Pass, No. 1:18–cv–01823 (D Ore.), ECF
Doc. 63–4, pp. 2, 16; Tr. of Oral Arg. 159. In that respect, the
city’s laws parallel those found in countless jurisdictions across
the country. See Part I–A, supra. And because laws like
these do not criminalize mere status, Robinson is not
implicated.[5]

															C

															If Robinson does not control this case,
the plaintiffs and the dissent argue, we should extend it so that
it does. Perhaps a person does not violate ordinances like Grants
Pass’s simply by being homeless but only by engaging in certain
acts (actus rei) with certain mental states (mentes
reae). Still, the plaintiffs and the dissent insist, laws like
these seek to regulate actions that are in some sense
“involuntary,” for some homeless persons cannot help but do what
the law forbids. See Brief for Respondents 24–25, 29, 32;
post, at 16–17 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). And, the
plaintiffs and the dissent continue, we should extend
Robinson to prohibit the enforcement of laws that operate
this way—laws that don’t proscribe status as such but that
proscribe acts, even acts undertaken with some required mental
state, the defendant cannot help but undertake. Post, at
16–17. To rule otherwise, the argument goes, would
“ ‘effectively’ ” allow cities to punish a person because
of his status. Post, at 25. The Ninth Circuit pursued just
this line of thinking below and in Martin.

															The problem is, this Court has already rejected
that view. In Powell v. Texas, 392 U.S.
514 (1968), the Court confronted a defendant who had been
convicted under a Texas statute making it a crime to “ ‘get
drunk or be found in a state of intoxication in any public
place.’ ” Id., at 517 (plurality opinion). Like the
plaintiffs here, Mr. Powell argued that his drunkenness was an
“ ‘involuntary’ ” byproduct of his status as an
alcoholic. Id., at 533. Yes, the statute required proof of
an act (becoming drunk or intoxicated and then proceeding into
public), and perhaps some associated mental state (for presumably
the defendant knew he was drinking and maybe even knew he made his
way to a public place). Still, Mr. Powell contended, Texas’s law
effectively criminalized his status as an alcoholic because he
could not help but doing as he did. Ibid. Justice Fortas
embraced that view, but only in dissent: He would have extended
Robinson to cover conduct that flows from any “condition
[the defendant] is powerless to change.” 392 U. S., at 567
(Fortas, J., dissenting).

															The Court did not agree. Writing for a
plurality, Justice Marshall observed that Robinson had
authorized “a very small” intrusion by courts “into the substantive
criminal law” “under the aegis of the Cruel and Unusual
Punishment[s] Clause.” 392 U. S., at 533. That small
intrusion, Justice Marshall said, prevents States only from
enforcing laws that criminalize “a mere status.” Id., at
532. It does nothing to curtail a State’s authority to secure a
conviction when “the accused has committed some act . . .
society has an interest in preventing.” Id., at 533. That
remains true, Justice Marshall continued, regardless whether the
defendant’s act “in some sense” might be described as
“ ‘involuntary’ or ‘occasioned by’ ”
a particular status. Ibid. (emphasis added). In this,
Justice Marshall echoed Robinson itself, where the Court
emphasized that California remained free to criminalize intentional
or knowing drug use even by addicts whose conduct, too, in some
sense could be considered involuntary. See Robinson, 370
U. S., at 664, 666. Based on all this, Justice Marshall
concluded, because the defendant before the Court had not been
convicted “for being” an “alcoholic, but for [engaging in the act
of] being in public while drunk on a particular occasion,”
Robinson did not apply. Powell, 392 U. S., at
532.[6]

															This case is no different from Powell.
Just as there, the plaintiffs here seek to expand Robinson’s
“small” intrusion “into the substantive criminal law.” Just as
there, the plaintiffs here seek to extend its rule beyond laws
addressing “mere status” to laws addressing actions that, even if
undertaken with the requisite mens rea, might “in some
sense” qualify as “ ‘involuntary.’ ” And just as
Powell could find nothing in the Eighth Amendment permitting
that course, neither can we. As we have seen, Robinson
already sits uneasily with the Amendment’s terms, original meaning,
and our precedents. Its holding is restricted to laws that
criminalize “mere status.” Nothing in the decision called into
question the “broad power” of States to regulate acts undertaken
with some mens rea. And, just as in Powell, we
discern nothing in the Eighth Amendment that might provide us with
lawful authority to extend Robinson beyond its narrow
holding.

															To be sure, and once more, a variety of other
legal doctrines and constitutional provisions work to protect those
in our criminal justice system from a conviction. Like some other
jurisdictions, Oregon recognizes a “necessity ” defense to
certain criminal charges. It may be that defense extends to charges
for illegal camping when it comes to those with nowhere else to go.
See State v. Barrett, 302 Ore. App. 23, 28, 460 P.3d
93, 96 (2020) (citing Ore. Rev. Stat. §161.200). Insanity,
diminished-capacity, and duress defenses also may be available in
many jurisdictions. See Powell, 392 U. S., at 536.
States and cities are free as well to add additional substantive
protections. Since this litigation began, for example, Oregon
itself has adopted a law specifically addressing how far its
municipalities may go in regulating public camping. See,
e.g., Ore. Rev. Stat. §195.530(2) (2023). For that matter,
nothing in today’s decision prevents States, cities, and counties
from going a step further and declining to criminalize public
camping altogether. For its part, the Constitution provides many
additional limits on state prosecutorial power, promising fair
notice of the laws and equal treatment under them, forbidding
selective prosecutions, and much more besides. See Part II–A,
supra; and n. 5, supra. All this represents only
a small sample of the legion protections our society affords a
presumptively free individual from a criminal conviction. But aside
from Robinson, a case directed to a highly unusual law that
condemned status alone, this Court has never invoked the Eighth
Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause to perform that
function.

															D

															Not only did Powell decline to extend
Robinson to “involuntary” acts, it stressed the dangers that
would likely attend any attempt to do so. Were the Court to pursue
that path in the name of the Eighth Amendment, Justice Marshall
warned, “it is difficult to see any limiting principle that would
serve to prevent this Court from becoming . . . the
ultimate arbiter of the standards of criminal responsibility, in
diverse areas of the criminal law, throughout the country.”
Powell, 392 U. S., at 533. After all, nothing in the
Amendment’s text or history exists to “confine” or guide our
review. Id., at 534. Unaided by those sources, we would be
left “to write into the Constitution” our own “formulas,” many of
which would likely prove unworkable in practice. Id., at
537. Along the way, we would interfere with “essential
considerations of federalism” that reserve to the States primary
responsibility for drafting their own criminal laws. Id., at
535.

															In particular, Justice Marshall observed,
extending Robinson to cover involuntary acts would
effectively “impe[l]” this Court “into defining” something akin to
a new “insanity test in constitutional terms.” 392 U. S., at
536. It would because an individual like the defendant in
Powell does not dispute that he has committed an otherwise
criminal act with the requisite mens rea, yet he seeks to be
excused from “moral accountability” because of his
“ ‘condition.’ ” Id., at 535–536. And “[n]othing,”
Justice Marshall said, “could be less fruitful than for this Court”
to try to resolve for the Nation profound questions like that under
a provision of the Constitution that does not speak to them.
Id., at 536. Instead, Justice Marshall reasoned, such
matters are generally left to be resolved through “productive”
democratic “dialogue” and “experimentation,” not by “freez[ing]”
any particular, judicially preferred approach “into a rigid
constitutional mold.” Id., at 537.

															We recently reemphasized that last point in
Kahler v. Kansas in the context of a Due Process
Clause challenge. Drawing on Justice Marshall’s opinion in
Powell, we acknowledged that “a state rule about criminal
liability” may violate due process if it departs from a rule “so
rooted in the traditions” of this Nation that it might be said to
“ran[k] as fundamental.” 589 U. S., at 279 (internal quotation
marks omitted). But, we stressed, questions about whether an
individual who has committed a proscribed act with the requisite
mental state should be “reliev[ed of] responsibility,” id.,
at 283, due to a lack of “moral culpability,” id., at 286,
are generally best resolved by the people and their elected
representatives. Those are questions, we said, “of recurrent
controversy” to which history supplies few “entrenched” answers,
and on which the Constitution generally commands “no one view.”
Id., at 296.

															The Ninth Circuit’s Martin experiment
defied these lessons. Under Martin, judges take from elected
representatives the questions whether and when someone who has
committed a proscribed act with a requisite mental state should be
“relieved of responsibility” for lack of “moral culpability.” 598
U. S., at 283, 286. And Martin exemplifies much of what
can go wrong when courts try to resolve matters like those unmoored
from any secure guidance in the Constitution.

															Start with this problem. Under Martin,
cities must allow public camping by those who are “involuntarily”
homeless. 72 F. 4th, at 877 (citing Martin, 920
F. 3d, at 617, n. 8). But how are city officials and law
enforcement officers to know what it means to be “involuntarily”
homeless, or whether any particular person meets that standard?
Posing the questions may be easy; answering them is not. Is it
enough that a homeless person has turned down an offer of shelter?
Or does it matter why? Cities routinely confront individuals who
decline offers of shelter for any number of reasons, ranging from
safety concerns to individual preferences. See Part I–A,
supra. How are cities and their law enforcement officers on
the ground to know which of these reasons are sufficiently weighty
to qualify a person as “involuntarily” homeless?

															If there are answers to those questions, they
cannot be found in the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. Nor do
federal judges enjoy any special competence to provide them. Cities
across the West report that the Ninth Circuit’s ill-defined
involuntariness test has proven “unworkable.” Oregon Cities Brief
3; see Phoenix Brief 11. The test, they say, has left them “with
little or no direction as to the scope of their authority in
th[eir] day-to-day policing contacts,”

															To be sure, Martin attempted to head off
these complexities through some back-of-the-envelope arithmetic.
The Ninth Circuit said a city needs to consider individuals
“involuntarily” homeless (and thus entitled to camp on public
property) only when the overall homeless population exceeds the
total number of “adequate” and “practically available” shelter
beds. See 920 F. 3d, at 617–618, and n. 8. But as
sometimes happens with abstract rules created by those far from the
front lines, that test has proven all but impossible to administer
in practice.

															City officials report that it can be
“monumentally difficult” to keep an accurate accounting of those
experiencing homelessness on any given day. Los Angeles Cert. Brief
14. Often, a city’s homeless population “fluctuate[s]
dramatically,” in part because homelessness is an inherently
dynamic status. Brief for City of San Clemente as Amicus
Curiae 16 (San Clemente Brief ). While cities sometimes
make rough estimates based on a single point-in-time count, they
say it would be “impossibly expensive and difficult” to undertake
that effort with any regularity. Id., at 17. In Los Angeles,
for example, it takes three days to count the homeless population
block-by-block—even with the participation of thousands of
volunteers. Martin, 920 F. 3d, at 595 (Smith, J.,
dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc).

															Beyond these complexities, more await. Suppose
even large cities could keep a running tally of their homeless
citizens forevermore. And suppose further that they could keep a
live inventory of available shelter beds. Even so, cities face
questions over which shelter beds count as “adequate” and
“available” under Martin. Id., at 617, and n. 8.
Rather than resolve the challenges associated with defining who
qualifies as “involuntarily” homeless, these standards more nearly
return us to them. Is a bed “available” to a smoker if the shelter
requires residents to abstain from nicotine, as the shelter in
Grants Pass does? 72 F. 4th, at 896; App. 39, Third Amended
Complaint ¶13. Is a bed “available” to an atheist if the shelter
includes “religious” messaging? 72 F. 4th, at 877. And how is
a city to know whether the accommodations it provides will prove
“adequate” in later litigation? 920 F. 3d, at 617, n. 8.
Once more, a large number of cities in the Ninth Circuit tell us
they have no way to be sure. See, e.g., Phoenix Brief 28;
San Clemente Brief 8–12; Brief for City of Los Angeles as Amicus
Curiae 22–23 (“What may be available, appropriate, or actually
beneficial to one [homeless] person, might not be so to
another”).

															Consider an example. The city of Chico,
California, thought it was complying with Martin when it
constructed an outdoor shelter facility at its municipal airport to
accommodate its homeless population. Warren v. Chico,
2021 WL 2894648, *3 (ED Cal., July 8, 2021). That shelter, we are
told, included “protective fencing, large water totes, handwashing
stations, portable toilets, [and] a large canopy for shade.” Brief
for City of Chico as Amicus Curiae on Pet. for Cert. 16.
Still, a district court enjoined the city from enforcing its
public-camping ordinance. Why? Because, in that court’s view,
“appropriate” shelter requires “ ‘indoo[r],’ ” not
outdoor, spaces. Warren, 2021 WL 2894648, *3 (quoting
Martin, 920 F. 3d, at 617). One federal court in Los
Angeles ruled, during the COVID pandemic, that “adequate” shelter
must also include nursing staff, testing for communicable diseases,
and on-site security, among other things. See LA Alliance for
Hum. Rights v. Los Angeles, 2020 WL 2512811, *4 (CD
Cal., May 15, 2020). By imbuing the availability of shelter with
constitutional significance in this way, many cities tell us,
Martin and its progeny have “paralyzed” communities and
prevented them from implementing even policies designed to help the
homeless while remaining sensitive to the limits of their resources
and the needs of other citizens. Cities Cert. Brief 4 (boldface and
capitalization deleted).

															There are more problems still. The Ninth Circuit
held that “involuntarily” homeless individuals cannot be punished
for camping with materials “necessary to protect themselves from
the elements.” 72 F. 4th, at 896. It suggested, too, that
cities cannot proscribe “life-sustaining act[s]” that flow
necessarily from homelessness. 72 F. 4th, at 921 (joint
statement of Silver and Gould, JJ., regarding denial of rehearing).
But how far does that go? The plaintiffs before us suggest a
blanket is all that is required in Grants Pass. Brief for
Respondents 14. But might a colder climate trigger a right to
permanent tent encampments and fires for warmth? Because the
contours of this judicial right are so “uncertai[n],” cities across
the West have been left to guess whether Martin forbids
their officers from removing everything from tents to “portable
heaters” on city sidewalks. Brief for City of Phoenix et al.
on Pet. for Cert. 19, 29 (Phoenix Cert. Brief ). There is
uncertainty, as well, over whether Martin requires cities to
tolerate other acts no less “attendant [to] survival” than
sleeping, such as starting fires to cook food and “public urination
[and] defecation.” Phoenix Cert. Brief 29–30; see also
Mahoney v. Sacramento, 2020 WL 616302, *3 (ED Cal.,
Feb. 10, 2020) (indicating that “the [c]ity may not prosecute or
otherwise penalize the [homeless] for eliminating in public if
there is no alternative to doing so”). By extending Robinson
beyond the narrow class of status crimes, the Ninth Circuit has
created a right that has proven “impossible” for judges to
delineate except “by fiat.” Powell, 392 U. S., at
534.

															Doubtless, the Ninth Circuit’s intervention in
Martin was well-intended. But since the trial court entered
its injunction against Grants Pass, the city shelter reports that
utilization of its resources has fallen by roughly 40 percent. See
Brief for Grants Pass Gospel Rescue Mission as Amicus Curiae
4–5. Many other cities offer similar accounts about their
experiences after Martin, telling us the decision has made
it more difficult, not less, to help the homeless accept shelter
off city streets. See Part I–B, supra (recounting examples).
Even when “policymakers would prefer to invest in more permanent”
programs and policies designed to benefit homeless and other
citizens, Martin has forced these “overwhelmed jurisdictions
to concentrate public resources on temporary shelter beds.” Cities
Brief 25; see Oregon Cities Brief 17–20; States Brief 16–17. As a
result, cities report, Martin has undermined their efforts
to balance conflicting public needs and mired them in litigation at
a time when the homelessness crisis calls for action. See States
Brief 16–17.

															All told, the Martin experiment is
perhaps just what Justice Marshall anticipated ones like it would
be. The Eighth Amendment provides no guidance to “confine” judges
in deciding what conduct a State or city may or may not proscribe.
Powell, 392 U. S., at 534. Instead of encouraging
“productive dialogue” and “experimentation” through our democratic
institutions, courts have frozen in place their own “formulas” by
“fiat.” Id., at 534, 537. Issued by federal courts removed
from realities on the ground, those rules have produced confusion.
And they have interfered with “essential considerations of
federalism,” taking from the people and their elected leaders
difficult questions traditionally “thought to be the[ir] province.”
Id., at 535–536.[7]

															E

															Rather than address what we have actually
said, the dissent accuses us of extending to local governments an
“unfettered freedom to punish,” post, at 25, and stripping
away any protections “the Constitution” has against “criminalizing
sleeping,” post, at 5. “Either stay awake,” the dissent
warns, “or be arrested.” Post, at 2. That is gravely
mistaken. We hold nothing of the sort. As we have stressed, cities
and States are not bound to adopt public-camping laws. They may
also choose to narrow such laws (as Oregon itself has recently).
Beyond all that, many substantive legal protections and provisions
of the Constitution may have important roles to play when States
and cities seek to enforce their laws against the homeless. See
Parts II–A, II–C, supra. The only question we face is
whether one specific provision of the Constitution—the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause of the Eighth Amendment—prohibits the
enforcement of public-camping laws.

															Nor does the dissent meaningfully engage with
the reasons we have offered for our conclusion on that question. It
claims that we “gratuitously” treat Robinson “as an
outlier.” Post, at 12, and n. 2. But the dissent does
not dispute that the law Robinson faced was an anomaly,
punishing mere status. The dissent does not dispute that
Robinson’s decision to address that law under the rubric of
the Eighth Amendment is itself hard to square with the Amendment’s
text and this Court’s other precedents interpreting it. And the
dissent all but ignores Robinson’s own insistence that a
different result would have obtained in that case if the law there
had proscribed an act rather than status alone.

															Tellingly, too, the dissent barely mentions
Justice Marshall’s opinion in Powell. There, reasoning
exactly as we do today, Justice Marshall refused to extend
Robinson to actions undertaken, “in some sense,
‘involuntar[ily].’ ” 392 U. S., at 533. Rather than
confront any of this, the dissent brusquely calls Powell a
“strawman” and seeks to distinguish it on the inscrutable ground
that Grants Pass penalizes “status[-defining]” (rather than
“involuntary”) conduct. Post, at 23. But whatever that might
mean, it is no answer to the reasoning Justice Marshall offered, to
its obvious relevance here, or to the fact this Court has since
endorsed Justice Marshall’s reasoning as correct in cases like
Kahler and Jones, cases that go undiscussed in the
dissent. See n. 6, supra. The only extraordinary result
we might reach in this case is one that would defy Powell,
ignore the historical reach of the Eighth Amendment, and transform
Robinson’s narrow holding addressing a peculiar law
punishing status alone into a new rule that would bar the
enforcement of laws that are, as the dissent puts it,
“ ‘pervasive’ ” throughout the country. Post, at
15; Part I–A, supra.

															To be sure, the dissent seeks to portray the new
rule it advocates as a modest, “limited,” and “narrow” one
addressing only those who wish to fulfill a “biological necessity”
and “keep warm outside with a blanket” when they have no other
“adequate” place “to go.” Post, at 1, 5, 10, 21, 24. But
that reply blinks the difficult questions that necessarily follow
and the Ninth Circuit has been forced to confront: What does it
mean to be “involuntarily” homeless with “no place to go”? What
kind of “adequate” shelter must a city provide to avoid being
forced to allow people to camp in its parks and on its sidewalks?
And what are people entitled to do and use in public spaces to
“keep warm” and fulfill other “biological necessities”?[8]

															Those unavoidable questions have plunged courts
and cities across the Ninth Circuit into waves of litigation. And
without anything in the Eighth Amendment to guide them, any answers
federal judges can offer (and have offered) come, as Justice
Marshall foresaw, only by way of “fiat.” Powell, 392
U. S., at 534. The dissent cannot escape that hard truth. Nor
can it escape the fact that, far from narrowing Martin, it
would expand its experiment from one circuit to the entire
country—a development without any precedent in this Court’s
history. One that would authorize federal judges to freeze into
place their own rules on matters long “thought to be the province”
of state and local leaders, id., at 536, and one that would
deny communities the “wide latitude” and “flexibility” even the
dissent acknowledges they need to address the homelessness crisis,
post, at 2, 5.

															III

															Homelessness is complex. Its causes are many.
So may be the public policy responses required to address it. At
bottom, the question this case presents is whether the Eighth
Amendment grants federal judges primary responsibility for
assessing those causes and devising those responses. It does not.
Almost 200 years ago, a visitor to this country remarked upon the
“extreme skill with which the inhabitants of the United States
succeed in proposing a common object to the exertions of a great
many men, and in getting them voluntarily to pursue it.” 2 A. de
Tocqueville, Democracy in America 129 (H. Reeve transl. 1961). If
the multitude of amicus briefs before us proves one thing,
it is that the American people are still at it. Through their
voluntary associations and charities, their elected representatives
and appointed officials, their police officers and mental health
professionals, they display that same energy and skill today in
their efforts to address the complexities of the homelessness
challenge facing the most vulnerable among us.

															Yes, people will disagree over which policy
responses are best; they may experiment with one set of approaches
only to find later another set works better; they may find certain
responses more appropriate for some communities than others. But in
our democracy, that is their right. Nor can a handful of federal
judges begin to “match” the collective wisdom the American people
possess in deciding “how best to handle” a pressing social question
like homelessness. Robinson, 370 U. S., at 689 (White,
J., dissenting). The Constitution’s Eighth Amendment serves many
important functions, but it does not authorize federal judges to
wrest those rights and responsibilities from the American people
and in their place dictate this Nation’s homelessness policy. The
judgment below is reversed, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The dissent cites minutes
from a community roundtable meeting to suggest that officials in
Grants Pass harbored only punitive motives when adopting their
camping ban. Post, at 13–14 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). But
the dissent tells at best half the story about that meeting. In his
opening remarks, the Mayor stressed that the city’s goal was to
“find a balance between providing the help [homeless] people need
and not enabling . . . aggressive negative behavior” some
community members had experienced. App. 112. And, by all accounts,
the “purpose” of the meeting was to “develo[p ] strategies to
. . . connect [homeless] people to services.”
Ibid. The city manager and others explained that the city
was dealing with problems of “harassment” and “defecation in public
places” by those who seemingly “do not want to receive services.”
Id., at 113, 118–120. At the same time, they celebrated “the
strong commitment” from “faith-based entities” and a “huge number
of people” in the city, who have “come together for projects” to
support the homeless, including by securing “funding for a sobering
center.” Id., at 115, 123.
2
 Another named plaintiff,
Debra Blake, passed away while this case was pending in the Ninth
Circuit, and her claims are not before us. 72 F. 4th 868, 880,
n. 12 (2023). Before us, the city does not dispute that the
remaining named plaintiffs face a credible threat of sanctions
under its ordinances.
3
 Supporters of Grants
Pass’s petition for certiorari included: The cities of Albuquerque,
Anchorage, Chico, Chino, Colorado Springs, Fillmore, Garden Grove,
Glendora, Henderson, Honolulu, Huntington Beach, Las Vegas, Los
Angeles, Milwaukee, Murrieta, Newport Beach, Orange, Phoenix,
Placentia, Portland, Providence, Redondo Beach, Roseville, Saint
Paul, San Clemente, San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan Capistrano,
Seattle, Spokane, Tacoma, and Westminster; the National League of
Cities, representing more than 19,000 American cities and towns;
the League of California Cities, representing 477 California
cities; the League of Oregon Cities, representing Oregon’s 241
cities; the Association of Idaho Cities, representing Idaho’s 199
cities; the League of Arizona Cities and Towns, representing all 91
incorporated Arizona municipalities; the North Dakota League of
Cities, comprising 355 cities; the Counties of Honolulu, San
Bernardino, San Francisco, and Orange; the National Association of
Counties, which represents the Nation’s 3,069 counties; the
California State Association of Counties, representing California’s
58 counties; the Special Districts Association of Oregon,
representing all of Oregon’s special districts; the Washington
State Association of Municipal Attorneys, a nonprofit corporation
comprising attorneys representing Washington’s 281 cities and
towns; the International Municipal Lawyers Association, the largest
association of attorneys representing municipalities, counties, and
special districts across the country; the District Attorneys of
Sacramento and San Diego Counties, the California State Sheriffs’
Association, the California Police Chiefs Association, and the
Washington State Association of Sheriffs and Police Chiefs;
California Governor Gavin Newsom and San Francisco Mayor London
Breed; and a group of 20 States: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas,
Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia.
4
 This Court has never held
that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause extends beyond
criminal punishments to civil fines and orders, see Ingraham
v. Wright, 430 U.S.
651, 666–668 (1977), nor does this case present any occasion to
do so for none of the city’s sanctions defy the
Clause.
5
 At times, the dissent
seems to suggest, mistakenly, that laws like Grants Pass’s apply
only to the homeless. See post, at 13. That view finds no
support in the laws before us. Perhaps the dissent means to suggest
that some cities selectively “enforce” their public-camping laws
only against homeless persons. See post, at 17–19. But if
that’s the dissent’s theory, it is not one that arises under the
Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. Instead,
if anything, it may implicate due process and our precedents
regarding selective prosecution. See, e.g., United States v.
Armstrong, 517 U.S.
456 (1996). No claim like that is before us in this
case.
6
 Justice White, who cast
the fifth vote upholding the conviction, concurred in the result.
Writing only for himself, Justice White expressed some sympathy for
Justice Fortas’s theory, but ultimately deemed that “novel
construction” of the Eighth Amendment “unnecessary to pursue”
because the defendant hadn’t proven that his alcoholism made him
“unable to stay off the streets on the night in question.” 392
U. S., at 552, n. 4, 553–554 (White, J., concurring in
result). In Martin, the Ninth Circuit suggested Justice
White’s solo concurrence somehow rendered the Powell dissent
controlling and the plurality a dissent. See Martin v.
Boise, 920 F.3d 584, 616–617 (2019). Before us, neither the
plaintiffs nor the dissent defend that theory, and for good reason:
In the years since Powell, this Court has repeatedly relied
on Justice Marshall’s opinion, as we do today. See,
e.g., Kahler v. Kansas, 589 U.S. 271,
280 (2020); Clark v. Arizona, 548
U.S. 735, 768, n. 38 (2006); Jones v. United
States, 463 U.S.
354, 365, n. 13 (1983).
7
 The dissent suggests we
cite selectively to the amici and “see only what [we]
wan[t]” in their briefs. Post, at 24. In fact, all the
States, cities, and counties listed above (n. 3, supra)
asked us to review this case. Among them all, the dissent purports
to identify just two public officials and two cities that,
according to the dissent, support its view. Post, at 24–25.
But even among that select group, the dissent overlooks the fact
that each expresses strong dissatisfaction with how Martin
has been applied in practice. See San Francisco Brief 15, 26
(“[T]he Ninth Circuit and its lower courts have repeatedly
misapplied and overextended the Eighth Amendment” and “hamstrung
San Francisco’s balanced approach to addressing the homelessness
crisis”); Brief for City of Los Angeles as Amicus Curiae 6
(“[T]he sweeping rationale in Martin . . . calls
into question whether cities can enforce public health and safety
laws”); California Governor Brief 3 (“In the wake of Martin,
lower courts have blocked efforts to clear encampments while
micromanaging what qualifies as a suitable offer of shelter”). And
for all the reasons we have explored and so many other cities have
suggested, we see no principled basis under the Eighth Amendment
for federal judges to administer anything like
Martin.
8
 The dissent brushes aside
these questions, declaring that “available answers” exist in the
decisions below. Post, at 22. But the dissent misses the
point. The problem, as Justice Marshall discussed, is not that it
is impossible for someone to dictate answers to these questions.
The problem is that nothing in the Eighth Amendment gives federal
judges the authority or guidance they need to answer them in a
principled way. Take just two examples. First, the dissent says, a
city seeking to ban camping must provide “adequate” shelter for
those with “no place to go.” Post, at 21–22. But it never
says what qualifies as “adequate” shelter. Ibid. And, as we
have seen, cities and courts across the Ninth Circuit have
struggled mightily with that question, all with nothing in the
Eighth Amendment to guide their work. Second, the dissent seems to
think that, if a city lacks enough “adequate” shelter, it must
permit “ ‘bedding’ ” in public spaces, but not campfires,
tents, or “ ‘public urination or defecation.’ ”
Post, at 15, 21–22, 24. But where does that rule come from,
the federal register? See post, at 22. After Martin,
again as we have seen, many courts have taken a very different
view. The dissent never explains why it disagrees with those
courts. Instead, it merely quotes the district court’s opinion in
this case that announced a rule it seems the dissent happens to
prefer. By elevating Martin over our own precedents and the
Constitution’s original public meaning, the dissent faces difficult
choices that cannot be swept under the rug—ones that it can resolve
not by anything found in the Eighth Amendment, only by
fiat.


