::decision_cite:: 23-250
::decision_name::  Becerra v. San Carlos Apache Tribe
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kavanaugh
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 23–250 and 23–253

															_________________

															XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES, et al., PETITIONERS

															23–250v.

															SAN CARLOS APACHE TRIBE

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															

															XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES, et al., PETITIONERS

															23–253v.

															NORTHERN ARAPAHO TRIBE

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the tenth circuit

															[June 6, 2024]

															

															Justice Kavanaugh, with whom Justice Thomas,
Justice Alito, and Justice Barrett join, dissenting.

															The Indian Self-Determination Act allows Indian
tribes to assume control of healthcare programs that the Federal
Government would otherwise administer on a tribe’s behalf. When a
tribe assumes control of a healthcare program, the statute entitles
the tribe to federal funding for the costs of running the program,
as well as additional federal funding for associated administrative
costs.

															A separate federal law—the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act—authorizes tribes that assume control of healthcare
programs to collect third-party payments from Medicare, Medicaid,
and private insurers for the services that the tribes provide to
patients. The tribes may spend that third-party income for any
healthcare-related purpose—for example, building new healthcare
facilities. But spending the third-party income requires additional
expenditures on overhead.

															Consider a tribe that assumes control of a
healthcare program and receives federal funding pursuant to the
Self-Determination Act. For its services to patients, the tribe
also collects an additional $1 million from Medicare and Medicaid
pursuant to the Improvement Act. In order to spend that $1 million
on healthcare, the tribe must incur some amount of overhead
costs—let’s say $100,000. Who pays that $100,000? Must the Federal
Government pay it by giving the tribe another $100,000 in federal
funding? Or does the tribe pay the $100,000 out of the $1 million
in third-party income that it collected?

															That is the question in this case. For the past
30 years, the Executive Branch has interpreted the relevant
statutory provisions, 25 U. S. C. §§5325–5326, to require
tribes to pay those overhead costs out of the third-party income
collected from Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers. And
Congress has never overturned that consistent Executive Branch
practice.

															But today, the Court upends that long-settled
understanding and requires the Federal Government to furnish
additional funding to the tribes for the costs of spending the
third-party income. I respectfully dissent.

															As I see it, the relevant statutory provisions
do not support the Court’s decision. And the extra federal money
that the Court today green-lights does not come free. The Federal
Government estimates that adopting the tribes’ position could cost
between $800 million and $2 billion annually (and potentially many
billions more in retroactive payments). Yet as of now, Congress
appropriates about $8 billion annually for Indian healthcare. So if
Congress does not change the overall annual appropriations for
Indian healthcare, the Court’s decision will divert funding from
poorer tribes to richer tribes. (There are 574 federally recognized
tribes.) That is because poorer tribes are less likely to
administer their own healthcare programs and therefore do not
receive third-party income from Medicare, Medicaid, and private
insurers. Alternatively, the Court’s decision will require Congress
to substantially increase its overall annual appropriations for
Indian healthcare, thereby drawing money away from other vital
federal programs or requiring additional taxes.

															In my view, the Court should leave those
difficult appropriations decisions and tradeoffs to Congress and
the President in the legislative process, and not now upset the
settled legal understanding that has prevailed for the last 30
years.

															I

															The baseline provider of healthcare to
American Indians is the Indian Health Service—a Federal Government
agency. The Indian Health Service runs hospitals and other
healthcare programs that serve tribal members.

															To facilitate tribal self-determination and
self-governance, the Indian Self-Determination Act allows tribes to
assume control of the healthcare programs that the Indian Health
Service would otherwise operate on the tribes’ behalf. See 88Stat.
2206, as amended, 25 U. S. C. §§5321–5332. To assume
control of a healthcare program, a tribe enters into a
“self-determination contract” that identifies both the healthcare
program that the tribe will administer and the funding that the
Indian Health Service will give to the tribe. §5321(a)(1); see
§5329(c).

															Under the Act, the federal funding authorized in
each self-determination contract contains two main components:
(i) a secretarial amount and (ii) contract support funding.
The secretarial amount consists of the funds that the Indian Health
Service would have spent on the contracted programs in the absence
of the self-determination contract. §5325(a)(1). And contract
support funding covers the additional costs of certain activities
that a tribe “must” carry on “to ensure compliance with the terms
of ” its “contract.” §5325(a)(2).

															The contract support funding fills recognized
gaps in secretarial funding. When a tribe assumes control of a
healthcare program and provides the associated healthcare services,
the tribe will sometimes incur costs that the Indian Health Service
would not have incurred, such as the costs of contributing to state
workers’ compensation programs for the healthcare workers, as well
as extra administrative costs.

															The Federal Government does not fund those costs
through the secretarial amount, which covers only what the federal
agency would otherwise have spent on the tribe’s individual
healthcare program. See §5325(a)(1). So contract support funding
bridges the gap, covering the workers’ compensation and
administrative costs that the tribe must expend to comply with its
self-determination contract. See Cherokee Nation of Okla. v.
Leavitt, 543 U.S.
631, 635 (2005). By supplementing the secretarial amount in
that way, contract support funding assists tribes in providing the
same level of care as the Federal Government’s healthcare
programs.

															A separate federal statute—the Indian Health
Care Improvement Act—authorizes tribes that operate their own
healthcare programs to collect and spend payments they receive from
Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers for providing services to
patients. See §§1621e(a), 1641(d)(1); 42 U. S. C.
§§1395qq(a), 1396j(a). By law, the tribe possesses significant
flexibility in how to then spend that third-party income.
Specifically, the tribe may use its Medicare and Medicaid income
for “any health care-related purpose.” 25 U. S. C.
§1641(d)(2)(A).

															In this case, the San Carlos Apache Tribe and
the Northern Arapaho Tribe entered self-determination contracts to
assume control of healthcare programs that benefit their tribal
members. Each tribe therefore receives both a secretarial amount
and contract support funding from the Federal Government. The
tribes use that funding to provide healthcare services specified in
their contracts, including emergency medical services, outpatient
primary care, and dentistry.

															In addition to that federal funding, the two
tribes collect third-party payments from Medicare, Medicaid, and
private insurers. The tribes then spend that third-party income for
additional healthcare purposes, such as improvements to tribal
healthcare facilities. For example, the Northern Arapaho Tribe
spent some of its recent third-party income on “facility
construction.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 78. And the San Carlos Apache Tribe
might spend its third-party income on construction projects such as
“building a garage to house the ambulances” for an EMS program.
Id., at 87.

															II

															The tribes’ basic theory is that the federal
funding authorized by the Self-Determination Act for running the
healthcare programs specified in the tribes’ contracts may be
stretched to also cover the costs associated with the tribes’
spending of the third-party income that they collect under the
Improvement Act. The tribes do not argue that the Improvement Act
itself authorizes funding to cover those costs. Instead, they argue
that the Self- Determination Act does so.

															In assessing the tribes’ Self-Determination Act
argument, two provisions of that Act are key. The first is 25
U. S. C. §5325, which authorizes federal funding for
tribes that administer their own healthcare programs. The second is
§5326, which places important constraints on that federal
funding.

															Section 5325 begins by authorizing the
secretarial amount. Recall that §5325(a)(1) entitles each tribe
that administers its own healthcare program to the federal funding
that the Indian Health Service would have otherwise spent on the
“program” covered by that tribe’s self-determination “contract.”
§5325(a)(1).

															And §5325(a)(2) then entitles each tribe to
contract support funding. That contract support funding covers only
those costs, such as administrative costs, that the tribe “must”
incur to provide the healthcare “program” specified by the
“contract.” §5325(a)(2).[1]

															Section 5326 then imposes two important
limitations on contract support funding. First, §5326 confines
contract support funding to costs that are “directly attributable”
to, as relevant here, self-determination contracts. Second, §5326
prohibits contract support funding that is “associated with any
contract” between a tribe and “any entity other than the Indian
Health Service.” Those two limitations apply “notwithstanding any
other provision of law.” §5326.[2]

															The tribes argue that the Federal Government
must provide contract support funding to cover the tribes’ costs of
spending their third-party income from Medicare, Medicaid, and
private insurers. But the Federal Government disagrees. As the
Federal Government sees things, contract support funding supports
only the tribes’ performance of their contracts. So contract
support funding provided pursuant to the Self-Determination Act
cannot be stretched to cover the entirely separate tribal costs
associated with spending their third-party income from Medicare and
Medicaid pursuant to the Improvement Act.

															For five reasons, I agree with the Federal
Government.

															First, the statutory authorization for
contract support funding in §5325(a)(2) of the Self-Determination
Act does not even mention the third-party income that tribes
collect pursuant to the Improvement Act from Medicare, Medicaid,
and private insurance companies. If Congress intended §5325(a)(2)
to supply federal funding for the overhead costs incurred in
spending that third-party income, Congress surely would have said
so in the Improvement Act, the Self-Determination Act, or other
statutory text. That is particularly so given the relatively large
amount of additional appropriations that would be necessary (up to
$800 million to $2 billion per year, according to the Federal
Government). Congress does not usually employ subtle indirection to
dish out such significant pots of federal money to agency programs.
And if the Executive Branch for three decades had somehow
misunderstood Congress’s instructions, Congress could have amended
the statute. It did not.

															Second, §5325(a)(2) authorizes contract
support funding only for the activities that a tribe “must” perform
to comply with its self-determination “contract” and support its
“contracted program.” That provision authorizes contract support
funding for the administrative costs of spending a tribe’s
secretarial amount on the healthcare programs specified in the
tribe’s self-determination contract. Contract support funding
therefore bridges the gap between the secretarial funds that the
Federal Government would have spent on a healthcare program and
what the tribe “must” spend to obtain the same benefit from those
secretarial funds. §5325(a)(2); see supra, at 4.

															But all agree that, for example, §5325(a)(2)
does not authorize contract support funding for the costs of
spending the money in the tribe’s general treasury—money that the
tribe receives independently of its contract and that the tribe may
spend for any lawful purpose. In the same way, §5325(a)(2) does not
authorize contract support funding for the costs of spending the
tribe’s Medicare and Medicaid payments—payments that the tribe
receives from transactions outside of its healthcare contract
(pursuant to the Improvement Act) and that the tribe may spend on
“any health care-related purpose.” §1641(d)(2)(A). The costs of
spending the tribe’s Medicare and Medicaid income therefore
resemble the costs of spending money from the tribe’s general
treasury. And neither category of costs is necessary to support the
tribe’s “contract” and “contracted program”—the statutorily imposed
conditions for obtaining additional contract support funding.
§5325(a)(2).[3]

															Third, turning to §5326, that provision
independently restricts contract support funding to the costs that
are “directly attributable” to tribes’ self-determination
contracts. The costs of spending the Medicare and Medicaid income
are not directly attributable to the contracts in this case. After
all, the contracts do not address how the tribes must spend their
third-party income. Moreover, the Improvement Act allows tribes to
spend their Medicare and Medicaid income on “any health
care-related purpose,” §1641(d)(2)(A), not just to support
contractual activities specified by the self-determination
contracts. And tribes have made use of that flexibility to spend
their third-party income on healthcare services and construction
projects that fall outside of their individual contracts. For
example, the Northern Arapaho Tribe spent some of its recent
third-party income on facility construction, even though the
tribe’s contract does not authorize facility construction. See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 78. Because tribes may spend third-party income on
programs that are never mentioned in their self-determination
contracts, the costs of spending that income are not “directly
attributable” to those contracts. §5326.

															Fourth, §5326 separately precludes
contract support funding that is “associated with any contract”
between a tribe and an “entity other than the Indian Health
Service.” To obtain Medicare and Medicaid payments, the tribes
enter into contracts with the Secretary of Health and Human
Services for Medicare and with state agencies for Medicaid. See 42
U. S. C. §§1395cc, 1395qq, 1396a(a)(27), 1396j; see also
Brief for Petitioners 27 (“To receive Medicare and Medicaid
reimbursements, tribal providers enter into agreements with
Medicare and Medicaid authorities”). Those contracts are plainly
contracts between tribes and entities “other than” the Indian
Health Service. 25 U. S. C. §5326. And the tribes’
requested funding is clearly “associated with” the money that the
tribes receive as a result of those contracts. Ibid. It
follows that tribes may not obtain contract support funding to
cover the costs of spending their Medicare and Medicaid income.
Ibid.
Fifth, another statutory provision in the
Self-Determination Act underscores the separation between
(i) the federal funding that tribes receive due to their
self-determination contracts and (ii) the third-party income that
tribes collect from Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurers.
Section 5388(j) states that all third-party income “earned by an
Indian tribe shall be treated as supplemental funding” to the
funding available through the tribe’s self-determination contract.
Because the tribe’s third-party income is “supplemental,” the costs
of spending that income are legally separate from the costs of
supporting the contract. For that reason too, contract support
funding cannot encompass the costs of spending third-party income.
See Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe v.
Becerra, 6 F. 4th 6, 14 (CADC 2021).[4]

															In my view, each of those five arguments
individually casts substantial doubt on the Court’s conclusion
today. And the five arguments taken together convincingly show that
the Court’s conclusion is mistaken. The bottom line is that §5325
does not authorize and, in any event, §§5326 and 5388(j) prohibit
the Federal Government from covering the tribes’ costs of spending
their third-party income. That straightforward reading of the
Self-Determination Act is why, for the last 30 years, the Executive
Branch has interpreted the statute not to authorize funding to the
tribes for the costs of spending third-party income.

															III

															To reach the contrary conclusion, the Court
creates a requirement that is absent from both the statute and the
contracts in this case—that tribes must spend all of their
third-party income received from Medicare and Medicaid on the
“programs transferred to them in their” self-determination
contracts. Ante, at 10. By doing so, the Court creatively
attempts to morph (i) the costs that a tribe incurs in spending
that third-party income into (ii) the category of costs that a
tribe must incur to “ensure compliance with” its “contract.”
§5325(a)(2).

															The Court’s effort to recharacterize the costs
of spending third-party income as contract support costs does not
work. The Improvement Act authorizes tribes to spend (and the
tribes do spend) their Medicare and Medicaid income on “any health
care-related purpose.” §1641(d)(2)(A). And the broad phrase “any
health care-related purpose” encompasses activities that are
not covered in tribes’ contracts, including “improvements in
health care facilities.” Ibid. Indeed, at oral argument, the
tribes in this case forthrightly acknowledged that they may use
third-party income to cover the costs of constructing new
healthcare facilities, even though their contracts do not authorize
construction. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 78, 87–88. That acknowledgment
was sensible, as the phrase “any health care-related purpose”
clearly expands the potential uses of Medicare and Medicaid income
beyond the purposes of a single contract. And that acknowledgment
completely undermines the basis for the Court’s decision
today.[5]

															If Congress wanted to limit the tribes’ spending
of their third-party income to supporting the programs in tribes’
self-determination contracts—and thereby wanted to cover the
tribes’ overhead costs of spending that third-party income—several
provisions in the statute illustrate how Congress could have done
so. See, e.g., §5325(a)(4)(A) (requiring that tribes
use savings for “additional services or benefits under the
contract”). For example, the Self-Determination Act contains a
model contract, and Congress might have used that contract to set
forth specific requirements regarding tribes’ use of third-party
income. See §5329(c). But Congress did not do so.

															Congress had good reasons for granting tribes
flexibility over the spending of their third-party income, and not
limiting that spending to support of the contract. Among other
things, that flexibility flows from the policy of
self-determination that runs throughout the statute. See §5302. For
present purposes, however, one byproduct of that flexibility is
that the overhead costs of spending third-party income are
untethered from the “program” in a self-determination “contract.”
§5325(a)(2). Likewise, those costs are not “directly attributable”
to a self-determination contract. §5326. As explained above, it
follows that the Federal Government is not authorized to reimburse
tribes for those costs.

															In an attempt to avoid that straightforward
conclusion, the tribes in this case (echoed by the Court) represent
that, at least recently, they have voluntarily spent their
third-party income only on their contracted programs. But a few
tribes’ voluntary choices not to spend third-party income as freely
as the Improvement Act allows does not solve their statutory
problem—which is that contract support funding by law does not
extend to funding for the costs associated with spending
third-party income.

															Nor can the Court glide over those difficulties
by invoking what it calls a “self-determination penalty.”
Ante, at 17. The Court writes that failing to fund the costs
of spending third-party income would penalize tribes for pursuing
self-government, on the theory that tribes would then need to pay
those costs using their third-party income. See ante, at
17–18. But the fact that a tribe must pay, for example, $100,000 in
overhead out of the $1 million in third-party income that it
receives does not warrant the label “self-determination
penalty.”

															Even within the narrow context of spending
Medicare and Medicaid income, moreover, there is no
self-determination penalty. The tribes can spend third-party income
with much greater flexibility than the Federal Government can.
Compare, e.g., §1641(c)(1)(B) (the Government must
“first” spend that income on compliance with Medicare and Medicaid
requirements), with §1641(d)(2)(A) (tribes may spend their
third-party income on “any health care-related purpose”). For
example, the tribes can use their Medicare and Medicaid income to
construct new healthcare facilities, whereas Congress has
prohibited the Indian Health Service from using Medicare and
Medicaid funds for that same purpose. See Reply Brief 11.

															In short, the rather loaded term
“self-determination penalty” is not an accurate or appropriate way
to describe how the Executive Branch has construed the statute for
the last 30 years. And if there were really such a penalty (there
is not), then the solution lies with Congress, not by judicially
rewriting Congress’s funding laws.

															The tribes raise a separate policy concern that
tribal hospitals are underfunded and that the Federal Government
does not reimburse them for the true costs of tribal healthcare.
They may or may not be right about that. But those arguments boil
down to disagreeing with the appropriations amount that Congress
has provided for Indian healthcare. Appropriations decisions often
require painful tradeoffs. But a court may not depart from the best
reading of a statute simply because a party disagrees with
Congress’s appropriations decisions for one program.

															That basic separation of powers principle
carries particular force when, as here, distorting Congress’s
appropriations decisions will have significant ripple effects. To
reiterate, according to the Federal Government, if it must fund the
costs of the tribes’ spending of their third-party income, that
could require an estimated $800 million to $2 billion annually in
additional federal expenditures. See Brief for Petitioners 44. If
the overall annual appropriations amount for Indian healthcare
stays the same, today’s decision will divert funding from poorer
tribes to richer tribes (again, because poorer tribes generally do
not administer their own healthcare programs and therefore do not
receive third-party income).[6]
Indeed, at oral argument, the Northern Arapaho Tribe acknowledged
that, in light of “simple mathematics,” a decision like the Court’s
today would shift money from one class of tribes to another class
of tribes. Tr. of Oral Arg. 61. Alternatively, today’s decision may
require Congress to substantially increase its overall annual
appropriations for Indian healthcare, thereby taking money away
from other federal programs or imposing additional costs on
taxpayers.

															Rather than experimenting with reallocation of
those funds, or assuming without basis that Congress will increase
appropriations for Indian healthcare at the expense of other
national priorities (it might; it might not), I would simply follow
the statute as written.[7]

															*  *  *

															In sum, federal law does not authorize funding
to cover the tribes’ costs of spending their third-party income. I
respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
 The full text of
§5325(a)(2) states: “There shall be added to the amount required by
[§5325(a)(1)] contract support costs which shall consist of an
amount for the reasonable costs for activities which must be
carried on by a tribal organization as a contractor to ensure
compliance with the terms of the contract and prudent management,
but which—(A) normally are not carried on by the [Indian Health
Service in] direct operation of the program; or (B) are provided by
the [Indian Health Service] in support of the contracted program
from resources other than those under contract.”
2
 The full text of §5326
states: “Before, on, and after October 21, 1998, and
notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds available to the
Indian Health Service in this Act or any other Act for Indian
self-determination or self-governance contract or grant support
costs may be expended only for costs directly attributable to
contracts, grants and compacts pursuant to the Indian
Self-Determination Act [ 25 U. S. C. §5321 et seq.]
and no funds appropriated by this or any other Act shall be
available for any contract support costs or indirect costs
associated with any contract, grant, cooperative agreement,
self-governance compact, or funding agreement entered into between
an Indian tribe or tribal organization and any entity other than
the Indian Health Service.”
3
 The costs of spending
payments from private insurers are similarly detached from
the costs needed to support a tribe’s “contract” and “contracted
program.” §5325(a)(2). Tribes collect insurance payments pursuant
to the Improvement Act, which governs the “reasonable charges” that
a tribe may bill to private insurers. §1621e(a). And after the
tribe obtains its insurance payments, the tribe may spend them to
advance the “general purposes” of its healthcare contract,
§5325(m)(1)—a broad authorization that mirrors the tribe’s ability
to spend its Medicare and Medicaid payments on “any health
care-related purpose,” §1641(d)(2)(A).
4
 Section 5388(j) appears
in Title V of the Self-Determination Act, which governs
self-governance compacts as opposed to self-determination
contracts. See Cohen’s Handbook of Federal Indian Law §22.02[3], p.
1389 (2012) (compacts give “additional flexibility in program
administration”). But the Self-Determination Act requires the
Government to fund both compacts and contracts pursuant to the
definitions of the secretarial amount and contract support funding
in §5325. See §§5325(a), 5388(c). And because §5388(j) makes clear
that third-party income is separate from the contract support
funding for self-governance compacts, the same is true regarding
the contract support funding for self-determination
contracts.
5
 Indeed, it is not clear
that all Indian tribes want to win on the ground that the Court
relies on today. Going forward from the Court’s opinion today, as I
understand it, the tribes may face greater restrictions on the
spending of their third-party income than they have previously
faced.
6
 See Harvard Project of
American Indian Economic Development, The State of the Native
Nations 230 (2008) (noting that tribes must have “resources—both
human and financial—to transition to tribal management” of
healthcare programs); GAO, F. Rusco, Indian Programs: Interior
Should Address Factors Hindering Tribal Administration of Federal
Programs 11 (GAO–19–87, 2019) (“The capacity of a tribal government
to administer a federal program or manage its resources is a key
factor that can affect a tribe’s decision to enter into a
self-determination contract”).
7
 Some of the lower-court
litigation in this case has concerned the meaning of
§5325(a)(3)(A), which divides contract support costs into two
categories: direct costs and indirect costs. Of note, the tribes in
this case argued that they are entitled to contract support funding
for expenses that fall within the language of §5325(a)(3)(A), even
if those expenses do not satisfy §5325(a)(2). See Brief for San
Carlos Apache Tribe 18; Brief for Northern Arapaho Tribe 30. That
is incorrect. See Cook Inlet Tribal Council, Inc. v.
Dotomain, 10 F. 4th 892, 895–896 (CADC 2021). The
Government notes, moreover, that adopting the tribes’ position on
that issue would have “broad ramifications beyond the funding
dispute at issue here.” Reply Brief 9, n. 2. I do not read the
Court’s decision today to adopt the tribes’ position on that issue.
Instead, tribes may obtain contract support funding only for
expenses that satisfy both §5325(a)(2) and §5325(a)(3)(A). See
ante, at 8–12.


