::decision_cite:: 23-235
::decision_name::  FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 23–235 and 23–236

															_________________

															FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,
et al., PETITIONER

															23–235v.

															ALLIANCE FOR HIPPOCRATIC MEDICINE,
et al.

															

															DANCO LABORATORIES, L.L.C.,
PETITIONER

															23–236v.

															ALLIANCE FOR HIPPOCRATIC MEDICINE,
et al.

															on writs of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the fifth circuit

															[June 13, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, concurring.

															I join the Court’s opinion in full because it
correctly applies our precedents to conclude that the Alliance for
Hippocratic Medicine and other plaintiffs lack standing. Our
precedents require a plaintiff to demonstrate that the defendant’s
challenged actions caused his asserted injuries. And, the Court
aptly explains why plaintiffs have failed to establish that the
Food and Drug Administration’s changes to the regulation of
mifepristone injured them. Ante, at 13–24.

															The Court also rejects the plaintiff doctors’
theory that they have third-party standing to assert the rights of
their patients. Ante, at 21, n. 5. Our third-party
standing precedents allow a plaintiff to assert the rights of
another person when the plaintiff has a “close relationship with
the person who possesses the right” and “there is a hindrance to
the possessor’s ability to protect his own interests.”
Kowalski v. Tesmer, 543 U.S.
125, 130 (2004) (internal quotation marks omitted). Applying
these precedents, the Court explains that the doctors cannot
establish third-party standing to sue for violations of their
patients’ rights without showing an injury of their own.
Ante, at 21, n. 5. But, there is a far simpler reason
to reject this theory: Our third-party standing doctrine is
mistaken. As I have previously explained, a plaintiff cannot
establish an Article III case or controversy by asserting another
person’s rights.[1] See June
Medical Services L. L. C. v. Russo, 591 U.S.
299, 366 (2020) (Thomas, J., dissenting); Kowalski, 543
U. S., at 135 (Thomas, J., concurring). So, just as
abortionists lack standing to assert the rights of their clients,
doctors who oppose abortion cannot vicariously assert the rights of
their patients.

															I write separately to highlight what appear to
be similar problems with another theory of standing asserted in
this suit. The Alliance and other plaintiff associations claim that
they have associational standing to sue for their members’
injuries.[2] Under the Court’s
precedents, “an association has standing to bring suit on behalf of
its members when: (a) its members would otherwise have standing to
sue in their own right; (b) the interests it seeks to protect are
germane to the organization’s purpose; and (c) neither the claim
asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of
individual members in the lawsuit.” Hunt v. Washington
State Apple Advertising Comm’n, 432 U.S.
333, 343 (1977). If an association can satisfy these
requirements, we allow the association to pursue its members’
claims, without joining those members as parties to the suit.

															Associational standing, however, is simply
another form of third-party standing. And, the Court has never
explained or justified either doctrine’s expansion of Article III
standing. In an appropriate case, we should explain just how the
Constitution permits associational standing.

															I

															Associational standing raises constitutional
concerns by relaxing both the injury and redressability
requirements for Article III standing. It also upsets other legal
doctrines.

															First, associational standing conflicts with
Article III by permitting an association to assert its members’
injuries instead of its own. The “judicial power” conferred by
Article III “is limited to cases and controversies of the sort
traditionally amenable to, and resolved by, the judicial process.”
See June Medical, 591 U. S., at 364 (opinion of
Thomas, J.) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[T]o
ascertain the scope of Article III’s case-or-controversy
requirement,” courts therefore “refer directly to the traditional,
fundamental limitations upon the powers of common-law courts.”
Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). Traditionally, a
plaintiff had to show a violation of his own rights to have his
claim considered by a common-law court. See id., at 364–366.
So, “private parties could not bring suit to vindicate the
constitutional [or other legal] rights of individuals who are not
before the Court.” Id., at 359. “After all, ‘[t]he province
of the court is, solely, to decide on the rights of
individuals,’ ” not to answer legal debates in the abstract.
Acheson Hotels, LLC v. Laufer, 601 U.S. 1, 10 (2023)
(Thomas, J., concurring in judgment) (quoting Marbury v.
Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 170 (1803)); see also ante, at
5–7.

															Associational standing seems to run roughshod
over this traditional understanding of the judicial power. Our
doctrine permits an association to have standing based purely upon
a member’s injury, not its own. If a single member of an
association has suffered an injury, our doctrine permits that
association to seek relief for its entire membership—even if the
association has tens of millions of other, non-injured members. See
Brief for Professor F. Andrew Hessick as Amicus Curiae 28
(explaining that, among other associations, the American
Association of Retired People’s “potential standing is staggering”
because our doctrine permits it to “sue to redress” the injury of a
single member out of its “almost thirty-eight million members”). As
I have already explained in the context of third-party standing,
Article III does not allow a plaintiff to seek to vindicate someone
else’s injuries. See June Medical, 591 U. S., at
364–366 (opinion of Thomas, J.); Kowalski, 543
U. S., at 135 (opinion of Thomas, J.). It is difficult to
see why that logic should not apply with equal force to an
association as to any other plaintiff. I thus have serious doubts
that an association can have standing to vicariously assert a
member’s injury.

															The Alliance’s attempted use of our
associational-standing doctrine illustrates how far we have strayed
from the traditional rule that plaintiffs must assert only their
own injuries. The Alliance is an association whose members are
other associations. See 1 App. 9–10. None of its members are
doctors. Instead, the Alliance seeks to have associational standing
based on injuries to the doctors who are members of its member
associations. Thus, the allegedly injured parties—the doctors—are
two degrees removed from the party before us pursuing those
injuries.

															Second, our associational-standing doctrine does
not appear to comport with the requirement that the plaintiff
present an injury that the court can redress. For a plaintiff to
have standing, a court must be able to “provid[e] a remedy that can
redress the plaintiff ’s injury.” Uzuegbunam v.
Preczewski, 592 U.S. 279, 291 (2021) (emphasis added). But,
as explained, associational standing creates a mismatch: Although
the association is the plaintiff in the suit, it has no injury to
redress. The party who needs the remedy—the injured member—is not
before the court. Without such members as parties to the suit, it
is questionable whether “relief to these nonparties . . .
exceed[s] constitutional bounds.” Association of American
Physicians & Surgeons v. FDA, 13 F. 4th 531,
540 (CA6 2021); see also Department of Homeland Security v.
New York, 589 U. S. ___, ___ (2020) (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring in grant of stay) (explaining that remedies “are meant
to redress the injuries sustained by a particular plaintiff in a
particular lawsuit”); Brief for Professor F. Andrew Hessick as
Amicus Curiae 18 (“A bedrock principle of the Anglo-American
legal system was that the right to a remedy for an injury was
personal”).

															Consider the remedial problem when an
association seeks an injunction, as the Alliance did here. See 1
App. 113. “We have long held” that our equity jurisdiction is
limited to “the jurisdiction in equity exercised by the High Court
of Chancery in England at the time of the adoption of the
Constitution.” Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo, S. A. v.
Alliance Bond Fund, Inc., 527 U.S.
308, 318 (1999). And, “as a general rule, American courts of
equity did not provide relief beyond the parties to the case.”
Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667, 717 (2018)
(Thomas, J., concurring). For associations, that principle
would mean that the relief could not extend beyond the association.
But, if a court entered “[a]n injunction that bars a defendant from
enforcing a law or regulation against the specific party before the
court—the associational plaintiff—[it would] not satisfy
Article III because it w[ould] not redress an injury.”
Association of American Physicians & Surgeons, 13
F. 4th, at 540 (internal quotation marks omitted).[3]

															Our precedents have provided a workaround for
this obvious remedial problem through the invention of the
so-called “universal injunction.” Universal injunctions typically
“prohibit the Government from enforcing a policy with respect to
anyone.” Trump, 585 U. S., at 713, n. 1
(Thomas, J., concurring). By providing relief beyond the
parties to the case, this remedy is “legally and historically
dubious.” Id., at 721; see also Labrador v.
Poe, 601 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2024) (slip op., at 4–5)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring in grant of stay). It seems no coincidence
that associational standing’s “emergence in the 1960s overlaps with
the emergence of [this] remedial phenomenon” of a similarly
questionable nature. Association of American Physicians &
Surgeons, 13 F. 4th, at 541. Because no party should be
permitted to obtain an injunction in favor of nonparties, I have
difficulty seeing why an association should be permitted to do so
for its members. Associational standing thus seems to distort our
traditional understanding of the judicial power.

															In addition to these Article III concerns, there
is tension between associational standing and other areas of law.
First, the availability of associational standing subverts the
class-action mechanism. A class action allows a named plaintiff to
represent others with similar injuries, but it is subject to the
many requirements of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23.
Associational standing achieves that same end goal: One lawsuit can
provide relief to a large group of people. “As compared to a class
action,” however, associational standing seems to require
“show[ing] an injury to only a single member,” and the association
“need not show that litigation by representation is superior to
individual litigation.” 13A C. Wright, A. Miller, & E. Cooper,
Federal Practice and Procedure §3531.9.5, pp. 879–880 (3d ed.,
Supp. 2023); see also Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 23(a).
Associational standing thus allows a party to effectively bring a
class action without satisfying any of the ordinary requirements.
Second, associational standing creates the possibility of
asymmetrical preclusion. The basic idea behind preclusion is that a
party gets only one bite at the apple. If a party litigates and
loses an issue or claim, it can be barred from reasserting that
same issue or claim in another suit. In general, preclusion
prevents the relitigation of claims or issues only by a party to a
previous action, and we have been careful to limit the exceptions
to that rule. See Taylor v. Sturgell, 553 U.S.
880, 892–893 (2008). In the context of associational standing,
the general rule would mean that preclusion applies only to the
association, even though the purpose of the association’s suit is
to assert the injuries of its members. See id., at 893–896.
But, if the association loses, it is not clear whether the adverse
judgment would bind the members. See Automobile Workers v.
Brock, 477 U.S.
274, 290 (1986) (suggesting that, if an association fails to
adequately represent its members, “a judgment won against it might
not preclude subsequent claims by the association’s members without
offending due process principles”). Associational standing might
allow a member two bites at the apple—after an association’s claims
are rejected, the underlying members might be able to assert the
exact same issues or claims in a suit in their own names.

															In short, our associational-standing doctrine
appears to create serious problems, both constitutional and
otherwise.

															II

															I am particularly doubtful of
associational-standing doctrine because the Court has never
attempted to reconcile it with the traditional understanding of the
judicial power. Instead, the Court departed from that traditional
understanding without explanation, seemingly by accident. To date,
the Court has provided only practical reasons for its doctrine.

															For over a century and a half, the Court did not
have a separate standing doctrine for associations. As far as I can
tell, the Court did not expressly contemplate such a doctrine until
the late 1950s. In NAACP v. Alabama ex rel.
Patterson, 357 U.S.
449 (1958), the Court permitted an association to assert the
constitutional rights of its members to prevent the disclosure of
its membership lists. While the Court allowed the NAACP to raise a
challenge on behalf of its members, it also acknowledged that the
NAACP had arguably faced an injury of its own. Id., at
459–460. The Court, however, soon discarded any notion that an
association needed to have its own injury, creating our modern
associational-standing doctrine. In National Motor Freight
Traffic Assn., Inc. v. United States, 372 U.S.
246 (1963) (per curiam), the Court suggested that an
uninjured industry group had standing to challenge a tariff
schedule on behalf of its members. Id., at 247. The Court
offered no explanation for how that theory of standing comported
with the traditional understanding of the judicial power. In fact,
the Court’s entire analysis consisted of a one-paragraph order
denying rehearing. Since then, however, the Court has parroted that
“[e]ven in the absence of injury to itself, an association
may have standing solely as the representative of its members.”
Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S.
490, 511 (1975) (emphasis added; citing National Motor
Freight Traffic Assn., 372 U. S. 246); see also,
e.g., Automobile Workers, 477 U. S., at
281. The Court has gone so far as to hold that a state agency—not a
membership organization at all—had associational standing to
“asser[t] the claims of the Washington apple growers and dealers
who form its constituency.” Hunt, 432 U. S., at
344.

															Despite its continued reliance on associational
standing, the Court has yet to explain how the doctrine comports
with Article III. When once asked to “reconsider and reject the
principles of associational standing” in favor of the class-action
mechanism, the Court justified the doctrine solely by reference to
its “special features, advantageous both to the individuals
represented and to the judicial system as a whole.” Automobile
Workers, 477 U. S., at 288–289. Those “special features”
included an association’s “pre-existing reservoir of expertise and
capital,” and the fact that people often join an association “to
create an effective vehicle for vindicating interests that they
share with others.” Id., at 289–290. But, considerations of
practical judicial policy cannot overcome the Constitution’s
mandates. The lack of any identifiable justification further
suggests that the Court should reconsider its
associational-standing doctrine.

															*  *  *

															No party challenges our associational-standing
doctrine today. That is understandable; the Court consistently
applies the doctrine, discussing only the finer points of its
operation. See, e.g., Students for Fair
Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of Harvard
College, 600 U.S. 181, 199–201 (2023). In this suit, rejecting
our associational-standing doctrine is not necessary to conclude
that the plaintiffs lack standing. In an appropriate case, however,
the Court should address whether associational standing can be
squared with Article III’s requirement that courts respect the
bounds of their judicial power.

Notes
1
 Certain forms of standing
that may be representational in a general sense, such as next
friend standing, are “not inconsistent with this point.” June
Medical Services, L. L. C. v. Russo, 591 U.S.
299, 365, n. 2 (2020) (Thomas, J., dissenting).
2
 By “associational
standing,” I do not refer to standing premised upon an
association’s own alleged injuries. Instead, I refer to the
doctrine that permits a plaintiff association to assert the rights
of its members. See Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S.
490, 511 (1975).
3
 This also raises the
question of who should pick the remedy. Associations “may have very
different interests from the individuals whose rights they are
raising.” Kowalski v. Tesmer, 543
U.S. 125, 135 (2004) (Thomas, J., concurring). For example, an
association might prefer an injunction preventing the enforcement
of a law that harms its members, while an injured member may
instead want damages to compensate him for his injuries. Or perhaps
a member would wish to settle the litigation, whereas an
association might want to continue the fight. Our
associational-standing doctrine ignores these obvious
concerns.


