::decision_cite:: 23-334
::decision_name::  Department of State v. Munoz
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–334

															_________________

															Department of State, et al., PETITIONERS
v. Sandra MuÑoz, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, dissenting.

															“The right to marry is fundamental as a matter
of history and tradition.” Obergefell v. Hodges,
576 U.S.
644, 671 (2015). After U. S. citizen Sandra Muñoz and her
Salvadoran husband spent five years of married life in the United
States, the Government told her that he could no longer reenter the
country. If she wanted to live together with him and their child
again, she would have to move to El Salvador. The reason? A
consular officer’s bare assertion that her husband, who has no
criminal record in the United States or El Salvador, planned to
engage in “unlawful activity.” 8 U. S. C.
§1182(a)(3)(A)(ii). Muñoz argues that the Government, having
burdened her fundamental right to marriage, owes her one thing: the
factual basis for excluding her husband.

															The majority could have resolved this case on
narrow grounds under longstanding precedent. This Court has already
recognized that excluding a noncitizen from the country can burden
the constitutional rights of citizens who seek his presence. See
Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S.
753, 765–770 (1972). Acknowledging the Government’s power over
admission and exclusion, the Mandel Court held that “a
facially legitimate and bona fide reason” for the exclusion
sufficed to justify that burden. Id., at 770. In this case,
after protracted litigation, the Government finally explained that
it denied Muñoz’s husband a visa because of its belief that he had
connections to the gang MS–13. Regardless of the validity of that
belief, it is a “facially legitimate and bona fide reason.”
Ibid.; see also ante, at 1 (Gorsuch, J., concurring
in judgment). Under this Court’s precedent, that is enough.

															Instead, the majority today chooses a broad
holding on marriage over a narrow one on procedure.[1] It holds that Muñoz’s right to marry, live
with, and raise children alongside her husband entitles her to
nothing when the Government excludes him from the country. Despite
the majority’s assurance two Terms ago that its eradication of the
right to abortion “does not undermine . . . in any way”
other entrenched substantive due process rights such as “the right
to marry,” “the right to reside with relatives,” and “the right to
make decisions about the education of one’s children,” the Court
fails at the first pass. Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, 597 U.S. 215, 256–257 (2022). Because, to me,
there is no question that excluding a citizen’s spouse burdens her
right to marriage, and that burden requires the Government to
provide at least a factual basis for its decision, I respectfully
dissent.

															I

															A

															Marriage is not an automatic ticket to a green
card. A married citizen-noncitizen couple must jump through a
series of administrative hoops to apply for the lawful permanent
residency that marriage can confer. Noncitizen spouses coming from
abroad must apply for a visa to enter the United States. In certain
cases, however, the law requires even couples who meet and marry in
the United States to send the noncitizen spouse back to his country
of origin to do the same thing. In doing so, the couple must take
an enormous risk to pursue the stability of lawful immigration
status: the risk that when the noncitizen spouse tries to reenter
the United States, he will face unexpected exile.

															In technical immigration terms, a noncitizen
spouse applying for a green card seeks to “[a]djus[t]” his
immigration “status” from “nonimmigrant to that of [a] person
admitted for permanent residence.” 8 U. S. C. §1255. To
do so, the citizen spouse must petition the Government on the
noncitizen’s behalf. The citizen spouse first sends United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) a petition to classify
the noncitizen spouse as an “immediate relative.”
§§1151(b)(2)(A)(i), 1154(a)(1)(A). Once USCIS approves the
petition, a noncitizen spouse who is already in the United States
can then apply to adjust his status to lawful permanent resident
without leaving the country. See §1255(a). For a noncitizen spouse
living outside of the United States, however, USCIS first approves
the immediate-relative petition, but then sends it to the consulate
of the country where the noncitizen spouse lives for processing.
See §1154(b); 22 CFR §§42.42, 42.61 (2023). A consular officer
interviews the noncitizen spouse and makes the final admission
decision. See 8 U. S. C. §§1201, 1202(f ).

															Because of idiosyncrasies in our immigration
system, not all noncitizen spouses living in the United States can
adjust their status with USCIS. Even when a couple meets, marries,
and lives in the United States, the noncitizen spouse may instead
have to travel back to his country of origin for consular
processing if he was never formally “inspected and admitted or
paroled” at the Border. §1255(a). A noncitizen who entered without
“inspect[ion]” in this way typically cannot adjust his status from
within the United States based on an immediate-relative petition.
See ibid. Once the citizen spouse submits the petition to
USCIS, the noncitizen spouse must return to his country of origin
and meet with a consular officer, who will then adjudicate his
application. See 22 CFR §§42.42, 42.61, 42.62.

															Living in the United States after initially
having entered without inspection is not unusual. In fact, the
Government endorses the presence of many of these members of our
national community. Recipients under the Deferred Action for
Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, for instance, may have been
brought across the border by their parents without inspection. Even
though DACA status entitles them to work and live in the country
without the immediate threat of removal, see 8 CFR §236.21(c), it
does not change their initial entry designation. As of the end of
2023, there were roughly 530,000 active DACA recipients in the
United States. See Dept. of Homeland Security (DHS), USCIS, Count
of Active DACA Recipients by Month of Current DACA Expiration (as
of Dec. 31, 2023). The same is true of the approximately 680,000
holders of Temporary Protected Status (TPS), who have been
designated temporarily unable to return to their home countries
because of war, natural disasters, or other extraordinary
circumstances. See DHS, Citizenship and Immigration Services
Ombudsman, Ann. Rep. 45 (June 30, 2023); Sanchez v.
Mayorkas, 593 U.S. 409, 419 (2021) (holding that TPS status
did not change an entry without inspection into a lawful admission
that would allow adjustment to lawful permanent residency from
within the United States). Even when married to a U. S.
citizen, DACA recipients and TPS holders are barred from adjusting
status within the United States if they entered without inspection.
See 8 U. S. C. §1255(a).

															Ironically, the longer the noncitizen spouse has
lived in the United States, the more difficult and uncertain the
process to adjust to lawful status can become. A noncitizen who
initially entered without inspection will accrue “unlawful
presence,” which can bar him from reentering the country if he
leaves. §1182(a)(9)(B). If a noncitizen who has lived in the United
States between six months and one year leaves and tries to reenter,
he will be subject to a 3-year reentry bar. §1182(a)(9)(B)(i)(I).
If he has lived in the United States for more than a year and tries
to reenter, he faces a 10-year ban. §1182(a)(9)(B)(i)(II).

															This scheme places couples who meet and marry in
the United States in a difficult position if the noncitizen spouse
entered without inspection. The couple can continue to live with
one spouse in a precarious immigration status; or, they can seek
the stability of permanent residency for the noncitizen spouse but
face a potential multiyear exile when he leaves and applies for
reentry.

															Recognizing this difficult choice, USCIS allows
a noncitizen spouse to apply for a waiver of inadmissibility for
any accrued unlawful presence before departing the United States
for his consular interview. To obtain such a waiver, the noncitizen
spouse must show that the citizen spouse will suffer “extreme
hardship” if her noncitizen spouse is not admitted.
§1182(a)(9)(B)(v). Then, once the noncitizen spouse returns to his
country of origin, if a consular officer approves his visa
application, he can reenter free from the inadmissibility bar.

															Consular officers fall under the State
Department, see §1104(a), not DHS, which oversees USCIS, see 6
U. S. C. §271(a). Even though DHS officers and consular
officers make admission determinations under the same substantive
laws, see §1182, in reality, a noncitizen seeking admission via
consular processing faces a far higher risk of arbitrary denial
with far less opportunity for review than a noncitizen seeking
admission from DHS.

															DHS officers are constrained by a framework of
required process that does not apply to consular processing. A
noncitizen denied adjustment of status in the United States must
receive notice and the reasons for a denial. See 8 CFR
§245.2(a)(5)(i); DHS, USCIS, Policy Manual, vol. 7, pt. A, ch.
11—Decision Procedures (June 14, 2024) (requiring that a denial
notice either “[e]xplain what eligibility requirements are not met
and why they are not met” or “[e]xplain the positive and negative
factors considered, the relative weight given to each factor
individually and collectively, and why the negative factors
outweigh the positive factors”). He can renew his application in
removal proceedings before an immigration court, see 8
U. S. C. §1229b(b)(1), where DHS must present any
evidence against him in adversarial proceedings, see §§1229(a),
1229a(b)(4)(B), 1229a(c)(3). From those removal proceedings, a
noncitizen can petition for review to the Board of Immigration
Appeals (BIA), see 8 CFR §1003.1(b), and, ultimately, a federal
court of appeals, see 8 U. S. C. §1252(a).

															In contrast, a noncitizen denied admission via
consular processing is entitled to nothing more than a cite to the
statute under which the consular officer decided to exclude him.
§1182(b)(1).[2] He has no
opportunity for administrative or judicial review, and can only
submit more evidence and request reconsideration. 22 CFR §42.81(e).
Former consular officers tell this Court that this lack of
accountability, coupled with deficient information and inconsistent
training, means decisions often “rely on stereotypes or tropes,”
even “bias or bad faith.” Brief for Former Consular Officers as
Amici Curiae 8. Visa applicants may “experience disparate
outcomes based on nothing more than the luck or misfortune of which
diplomatic post and consular officer . . . they happen to
be assigned.” Id., at 8–9. The State Department’s Office of
the Inspector General has documented numerous deficiencies in
consular processing across several continents. See,
e.g., ISP–I–19–14, Inspection of Embassy Bogota,
Colombia, p. 16 (Apr. 2019) (finding consular managers in
Bogota required visa adjudicators to maintain an average of 30
in-person interviews per hour). Supervisors are required by the
State Department to review a certain percentage of visa denials but
often fail to do so. See, e.g., Office of Inspector
General, ISP–I–19–17, Inspection of Embassy Santo Domingo,
Dominican Republic, p. 12 (July 2019) (finding “managers did
not review 284 (23 percent) of the refusals that should have been
reviewed between April 1 and June 30, 2018”); Office of Inspector
General, ISP–I–16–24A, Inspection of Embassy Ankara, Turkey,
p. 20 (Sept. 2016) (finding visa adjudicator failed to review
the required 10% of visa issuances and 20% of visa denials).

															When the Government requires one spouse to leave
the country to apply for immigration status based on his marriage,
it therefore asks him to give up the process he would receive in
the United States and subject himself to the black box of consular
processing.

															B

															Muñoz, a celebrated workers’ rights lawyer
from Los Angeles, California, met Luis Asencio-Cordero in 2008,
three years after he had arrived in the United States. They have
been married since 2010 and have a child together. In 2013, Muñoz
filed an immediate-relative petition for her husband, which USCIS
approved. Because Asencio-Cordero had originally entered the United
States without inspection, the Government required him to return to
El Salvador, his country of origin, for consular processing to
obtain his immigrant visa. Yet he also faced a bar to reentry if he
left the country. DHS granted him a waiver of this bar upon his
anticipated return to the United States because of the “extreme
hardship” Muñoz would suffer if he were excluded. 8
U. S. C. §1182(a)(9)(B)(v). In April 2015,
Asencio-Cordero traveled from California to El Salvador. That was
the last time he stood on American soil.

															Asencio-Cordero attended the initial consular
interview in San Salvador on May 28, 2015. In December 2015, a
consular officer denied his visa application. As justification, the
denial cited only to §1182(a)(3)(A)(ii). That statute provides that
any noncitizen “who a consular officer . . . knows, or
has reasonable ground to believe, seeks to enter the United States
to engage solely, principally, or incidentally in . . .
any other unlawful activity . . . is inadmissible.” In
other words, the consular officer excluded Asencio-Cordero based on
a belief that he planned to engage in some unspecified unlawful
conduct upon return to the United States. “[U]nlawful activity”
could mean anything from jaywalking to murder.

															Asencio-Cordero has no criminal history in the
United States or El Salvador. See 50 F. 4th 906, 911 (CA9 2022);
Brief for Respondents 8, n. 5 (“It is uncontested that
Asencio-Cordero has never been charged with any crime”). With no
obvious justification for the consular officer’s belief, Muñoz and
Asencio-Cordero asked for reconsideration. Muñoz sought the help of
Congresswoman Judy Chu, who sent a letter to the State Department
on Muñoz’s behalf. The following day, the consulate responded to
the letter again with only a citation to §1182(a)(3)(A)(ii). In
January and April 2016, Muñoz asked the State Department for the
factual basis for her husband’s inadmissibility. She and her
husband provided evidence of her accolades at work and attestations
of Asencio-Cordero’s good moral character. A few days later, the
consulate notified Muñoz that the State Department had reviewed the
denial and concurred with the consular officer’s decision. It
denied reconsideration.

															After the consulate denied reconsideration,
Muñoz and her husband wrote to the State Department again
requesting a factual basis for the inadmissibility decision.
Asencio-Cordero has no criminal record, but he does have several
tattoos from his teenage years. App. 22. They depict a range of
subjects, including “Our Lady of Guadalupe, Sigmund Freud, a
‘tribal’ pattern with a paw print, and theatrical masks with dice
and cards.” Brief for Respondents 2, n. 2. Some of these
images have deep significance in Latin American culture. See,
e.g., Brief for Professors and Scholars as Amici
Curiae 8–10 (“Many Latin Americans view La Virgen de Guadalupe
as a special protector, and as a symbol of pan-Latinx identity that
transcends attachment to any one geography”). Some also happen to
appear on gang members. See ibid. (noting that “law
enforcement agencies and officials often use tattoos of common
Catholic imagery . . . as indicia of gang membership”).
Speculating about potential bases for a visa denial, Muñoz and her
husband included additional evidence from a court-approved gang
expert in their letter to the State Department. The expert reviewed
Asencio-Cordero’s tattoos and concluded that none were
“ ‘related to any gang or criminal organization in the United
States or elsewhere.’ ” 50 F. 4th, at 911. The State
Department responded that it lacked authority to overturn consular
decisions and “ ‘concurred in the finding of
ineligibility.’ ” Ibid. The consulate followed up in
May 2016, a year after Asencio-Cordero’s initial interview, by
listing all the entities that had reviewed the visa application and
noting that “ ‘there is no appeal.’ ” Ibid.

															It was only after Muñoz and her husband sued the
Government in Federal District Court that they finally received the
factual basis for the denial. After almost two years of litigation,
the Government submitted a declaration from a State Department
attorney-adviser. Id., at 912. That declaration stated that
the consular officer denied Asencio-Cordero’s visa application
under §1182(a)(3)(A)(ii) because “ ‘based on the in-person
interview, a criminal review of Mr. Asencio Cordero and a review of
. . . Mr. Asencio Cordero’s tattoos, the consular officer
determined that Mr. Asencio Cordero was a member of a known
criminal organization . . . specifically MS-13.’ ”
Ibid. (alterations omitted).

															The Court of Appeals ruled in Muñoz’s favor. It
held that the Government’s reason was too little, too late. The
denial of her husband’s visa burdened Muñoz’s right to marriage,
and the Government had provided inadequate process. Even though the
Government provided a “facially legitimate and bona fide” reason,
that reason was not “timely” enough to satisfy constitutional due
process requirements. Id., at 919–921. This Court granted
the Government’s petition for a writ of certiorari. 601 U. S.
___ (2024).

															II

															There was a simple way to resolve this case. I
agree with Justice Gorsuch that “the United States has now revealed
the factual basis for its decision to deny [Muñoz’s] husband a
visa,” and she has thus received whatever process she was due.
Ante, at 1 (opinion concurring in judgment).[3] That could and should have been the end of
it. Instead, the majority swings for the fences. It seizes on the
Government’s invitation to abrogate the right to marriage in the
immigration context and sharply limit this Court’s longstanding
precedent.

															Muñoz has a constitutionally protected interest
in her husband’s visa application because its denial burdened her
right to marriage. She petitioned USCIS to recognize their marriage
so that her husband could remain lawfully beside her and their
child in the United States. It was the extreme hardship Muñoz faced
from her husband’s exclusion that formed the basis for USCIS’s
waiver of his inadmissibility. For the majority, however, once
Muñoz’s husband left the country in reliance on those approvals,
their marriage ceased to matter. Suddenly, the Government owed her
no explanation at all.

															The constitutional right to marriage is not so
flimsy. The Government cannot banish a U. S. citizen’s spouse
and give only a bare statutory citation as an excuse. By denying
Muñoz the right to a factual basis for her husband’s exclusion, the
majority departs from longstanding precedent and gravely
undervalues the right to marriage in the immigration context.

															A

															The constitutional right to marriage has deep
roots. “[M]arriage,” this Court said over a century ago, “is
something more than a mere contract.” Maynard v.
Hill, 125 U.S.
190, 210–211 (1888). It is “the most important relation in
life,” id., at 205, and “the foundation of the family,”
id., at 211. This Court has described it in one breath as
the right “to marry, establish a home and bring up children,” a
right “long recognized at common law as essential to the orderly
pursuit of happiness by free men.” Meyer v. Nebraska,
262 U.S.
390, 399 (1923). In upholding the right of Mildred and Richard
Loving to have their marriage license from the District of Columbia
recognized by Virginia, this Court emphasized that “[m]arriage is
one of the ‘basic civil rights of man,’ fundamental to our very
existence and survival.” Loving v. Virginia,
388 U.S.
1, 12 (1967) (quoting Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel.
Williamson, 316 U.S.
535, 541 (1942)). Indeed, the right to marriage was one of the
first building blocks of substantive due process. The right was so
“ ‘fundamental’ ” and “ ‘implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty’ ” that the Roe Court invoked it as
part of the foundation underlying the right to abortion. Roe
v. Wade, 410 U.S.
113, 152–153 (1973) (cataloguing existing substantive due
process rights as extending to “marriage, procreation,
contraception, family relationships, and child rearing and
education” (citations omitted)), overruled, Dobbs, 597 U.S.
215.

															Almost 10 years ago, this Court vindicated the
expansiveness of the right to marriage. It upheld the right of
James Obergefell and his terminally ill husband, John Arthur, to
have their marriage from Maryland recognized in Ohio. Rejecting the
idea that “Ohio can erase [Obergefell’s] marriage to John Arthur
for all time” by declining to place Obergefell as the surviving
spouse on Arthur’s death certificate, this Court reasoned that
“ marriage is a right ‘older than the Bill of Rights.’ ”
Obergefell, 576 U. S., at 666, 678. Marriage
“ ‘fulfils yearnings for security, safe haven, and connection
that express our common humanity.’ ” Id., at 666.
“Marriage responds to the universal fear that a lonely person might
call out only to find no one there. It offers the hope of
companionship and understanding and assurance that while both still
live there will be someone to care for the other.” Id., at
667.

															The majority, ignoring these precedents, makes
the same fatal error it made in Dobbs: requiring too
“ ‘careful [a] description of the asserted fundamental liberty
interest.’ ” Ante, at 9 (quoting Washington v.
Glucksberg, 521 U.S.
702, 721 (1997)); cf. Dobbs, 597 U. S., at 374–375
(Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, JJ., dissenting). The majority
faults Muñoz’s invocation of the “ ‘fundamental right to
marriage’ ” as “difficult to pin down.” Ante, at 9.
Instead, it tries to characterize her asserted right as “an
entitlement to bring [her husband] to the United States,” even
though it acknowledges that Muñoz “disclaims that
characterization.” Ibid.
Obergefell rejected what the majority
does today as “inconsistent with the approach this Court has used
in discussing [the] fundamental rights” of “marriage and intimacy.”
576 U. S., at 671. Cataloguing a half century of precedent on
the right to marriage, the Court stressed that “Loving did
not ask about a ‘right to interracial marriage’; Turner did
not ask about a ‘right of inmates to marry’; and Zablocki
did not ask about a ‘right of fathers with unpaid child support
duties to marry.’ ” Ibid. Instead, “each case inquired
about the right to marry in its comprehensive sense” of “marriage
and intimacy.” Ibid. Similarly, Muñoz does not argue that
her marriage gives her the right to immigrate her husband. She
instead advances the reasonable position that blocking her from
living with her husband in the United States burdens her right “to
marry, establish a home and bring up children” with him.
Meyer, 262 U. S., at 399.

															This Court has never required that plaintiffs be
fully prevented from exercising their right to marriage before
invoking it. Instead, the question is whether a challenged
government action burdens the right. For example, the Court in
Zablocki v. Redhail, 434 U.S.
374 (1978), examined the “burde[n]” placed on fathers by a
statute that required a hearing to “counsel” them “as to the
necessity of fulfilling” any outstanding child support obligations
before being granted permission to marry. Id., at 387–388.
The Court in Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S.
78 (1987), applied Zablocki to incarcerated people to
hold that the particular prison marriage restriction at issue
“impermissibly burden[ed] the right to marry.” 482 U. S., at
97. There can be no real question that excluding a citizen’s spouse
from the country “burdens” the citizen’s right to marriage as this
Court has repeatedly defined it. This Court has never held that a
married couple’s ability to move their home elsewhere removes the
burden on their constitutional rights. It did not tell Richard and
Mildred Loving to stay in the District of Columbia or James
Obergefell and John Arthur to stay in Maryland. It upheld their
ability to exercise their right to marriage wherever they sought to
make their home.

															Muñoz may be able to live in El Salvador
alongside her husband or at least visit him there, but not everyone
is so lucky. The majority’s holding will also extend to those
couples who, like the Lovings and the Obergefells, depend on
American law for their marriages’ validity. Same-sex couples may be
forced to relocate to countries that do not recognize same-sex
marriage, or even those that criminalize homosexuality. American
husbands may be unable to follow their wives abroad if their wives’
countries of origin do not recognize derivative immigration status
from women (as was the case in this country for many years, see
ante, at 12 (noting visa “quotas . . . for female
citizens with noncitizen husbands” until 1952)). The majority’s
failure to respect the right to marriage in this country consigns
U. S. citizens to rely on the fickle grace of other countries’
immigration laws to vindicate one of the “ ‘basic civil rights
of man’ ” and live alongside their spouses. Loving, 388
U. S., at 12.

															B

															Given that the Government has burdened Muñoz’s
right to marriage by excluding her husband from the country, the
question is the remedy for that burden. Muñoz argues that this
burden triggers procedural due process protections in her husband’s
visa denial. Emphasizing that substantive due process rights like
the right to marriage usually trigger strict scrutiny, the majority
faults Muñoz for creating a right “in a category of one: a
substantive due process right that gets only procedural due process
protection.” Ante, at 10. Muñoz, however, did not create
that category of rights. This Court did. See Mandel, 408
U. S., at 768–770. This Court already set the ground rules for
when the Government’s exercise of its extensive power over the
exclusion of noncitizens burdens a U. S. citizen’s
constitutional rights. See id., at 770. In short, a
fundamental right may trigger procedural due process protections
over a noncitizen’s exclusion, but such protections are limited.
See ibid.

															Noncitizens who apply for visas from outside the
United States have no constitutional entitlement to enter the
country, and therefore typically have no constitutional process
protections in the visa application themselves. See Landon
v. Plasencia, 459 U.S.
21, 32 (1982). In contrast, noncitizens who already live in the
United States whom the Government seeks to remove have procedural
due process protections during that removal. See Yick Wo v.
Hopkins, 118 U.S.
356, 369 (1886); Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S.
678, 693 (2001). Had the Government sought to remove Muñoz’s
husband when they were living together in the United States, he
would have had his own constitutional protections in those
proceedings. Instead, because the Government forced him to leave
the country and reenter in order to adjust his immigration status,
he lost them.

															Not only do noncitizens seeking to enter the
United States lack constitutional process rights in their visa
applications. This Court has further insulated the Government’s
visa determinations from review by declining to evaluate them at
all. See ante, at 6–7. This judge-made “doctrine of consular
nonreviewability” reflects the Judicial Branch’s recognition that
the “ ‘admission and exclusion of foreign nationals’ ” is
an area of unusually heightened congressional and executive power.
Ante, at 6–7.[4] When
the de- nial of a noncitizen’s visa burdens a U. S. citizen’s
constitutional rights, however, this Court has had to reconcile the
importance of those rights with its recognition of Government
authority over visa determinations. In Mandel, it set the
remedy. The Mandel Court held that when a visa denial
“implicate[s]” a citizen’s rights, a court will not look behind a
“facially legitimate and bona fide” reason for the denial. 408
U. S., at 765, 769.

															In Mandel, a group of U. S.
professors sued the Government over the visa denial of Dr. Ernest
E. Mandel, a famous Belgian Marxist. See id., at 756,
759–760. The professors argued that excluding Mandel burdened their
First Amendment right to hear and meet with him in person. See
id., at 760. The Court agreed that the professors had a
First Amendment “ ‘right to receive information’ ” from
Mandel. Id., at 762, 764. It also emphasized, as the
majority does today, Congress’s power over the admission and
exclusion of noncitizens. See id., at 766–767; ante,
at 6–7. To avoid the need to balance “the strength of the
audience’s interest against that of the Government in refusing a
waiver to the particular [noncitizen] applicant, according to some
as yet undetermined standard,” Mandel, 408 U. S., at
768–769, the Court instead noted that “the Attorney General did
inform Mandel’s counsel of the reason for refusing him a waiver.
And that reason was facially legitimate and bona fide.”
Id., at 769 (emphasis added). Therefore, “when the Executive
exercises [conditional power to exclude] negatively on the basis of
a facially legitimate and bona fide reason, the courts will neither
look behind the exercise of that discretion, nor test it by
balancing its justification against the First Amendment interests
of those who seek personal communication with the applicant.”
Id., at 770. In other words, when a visa denial burdens a
noncitizen’s constitutional rights, rather than attempt to balance
the competing interests under strict scrutiny, a court should
accept the Government’s “facially legitimate and bona fide reason.”
Ibid. That minimal requirement ensures that courts do not
unduly intrude on “the Government’s sovereign authority to set the
terms governing the admission and exclusion of noncitizens,”
ante, at 11, while also ensuring that the Government does
not arbitrarily burden citizens’ constitutional rights.

															This Court has repeatedly relied on
Mandel’s test in the immigration context. See,
e.g., Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667,
703 (2018) (noting that “this Court has engaged in a circumscribed
judicial inquiry when the denial of a visa allegedly burdens the
constitutional rights of a U. S. citizen”); Fiallo v.
Bell, 430 U.S.
787, 794, 799 (1977) (relying on Mandel in declining to
“probe and test the justifications for [a] legislative” distinction
between mothers and fathers because this Court has applied limited
scrutiny to “resolv[e] similar challenges to immigration
legislation based on other constitutional rights of
citizens”).[5] Indeed, less
than a decade ago, six Justices ruling on the exact legal question
the Court confronts today would have held that Mandel
controlled or extended its protections even further in the marriage
context. See Kerry v. Din, 576 U.S.
86, 103–104 (2015) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment) (“The
reasoning and the holding in Mandel control
here. . . . Like the professors who sought an audience
with Dr. Mandel, [respondent] claims her constitutional rights were
burdened by the denial of a visa to a noncitizen, namely her
husband”); id., at 107 (Breyer, J., dissenting) (reasoning
that respondent’s “liberty interest [in] her freedom to live
together with her husband in the United States” is the kind “to
which the Due Process Clause grants procedural protection”).

															Outside the immigration context, this Court has
endorsed similar tests in circumstances where there is a heightened
underlying governmental power. For instance, in Turner, the
Court evaluated the right to marriage in the prison context. Even
though an incarcerated person “ ‘retains those
[constitutional] rights that are not inconsistent with his status
as a prisoner or with the legitimate penological objectives of the
corrections system,’ ” the Court emphasized that “[t]he right
to marry, like many other rights, is subject to substantial
restrictions as a result of incarceration.” 482 U. S., at 95
(quoting Pell v. Procunier, 417
U.S. 817, 822 (1974)). Only because the challenged prison
regulation there was not “reasonably related” to the government’s
articulated penological interests, or “legitimate security and
rehabilitation concerns,” did this Court hold it unconstitutional.
Turner, 482 U. S., at 95; see id., at 99.

															Just as Turner looked at burdens on the
right to marriage through the narrow lens of “penological
interests” to defer to the government’s control over prisons,
Mandel used a “facially legitimate and bona fide reason” to
defer to the Government’s power over the exclusion of noncitizens.
Neither case erased the constitutional right at issue. The Court
simply recognized that the right can be substantially limited in
areas where the government exercises unusually heightened
control.

															Applying Mandel and Turner here,
the remedy is clear. The Government’s exclusion of Muñoz’s husband
entitles her at least to the remedy required in Mandel: a
“facially legitimate and bona fide reason” for the exclusion. 408
U. S., at 770.

															C

															The majority resists this conclusion by
worrying about its “unsettling collateral consequences.”
Ante, at 16. The majority poses a series of hypotheticals
that it fears will result from recognizing the limited right Muñoz
proposes. These fears are groundless.

															First, the majority’s concern that applying
Mandel to Muñoz’s right to marriage in this case will result
in a slippery slope of constitutional challenges is unfounded.
Muñoz’s right triggers limited process protections in part because
her husband lost his own procedural protections when the Government
required him to leave the country. Muñoz’s right to marriage raises
that floor from zero process to some by requiring the Government to
provide a “facially legitimate and bona fide reason” when her
husband receives no process. In contrast, a citizen’s liberty
interest “in the removal proceeding of her spouse” in the United
States, ante, at 16, would presumably be limited by the
noncitizen’s own due process rights in that same proceeding.
Similarly, any challenge from a wife to her husband’s
“ ‘assignment to a remote prison,’ ” ibid., would
presumably be limited by the criminal procedural protections her
husband already received.

															Second, the majority’s reliance on
O’Bannon v. Town Court Nursing Center, 447 U.S.
773 (1980), is misplaced and highlights the speculative nature
of its concerns. O’Bannon rejected a freestanding
constitutional interest in avoiding “serious trauma.” Id.,
at 788. The residents of a government-funded nursing home sought
relief from transfer to alternative housing because of the
emotional harm they would suffer from the move. Id., at
777–781, 784. Muñoz, however, does not rely on a free-floating
emotional harm that separation from her husband will cause. She
invokes her fundamental right to marry, live, and raise a family
with her husband, the right recognized by this Court for centuries.
See supra, at 11–14. Denying her husband entry to the
country directly burdens that right.

															In sum, the majority’s concerns are unwarranted.
There are few circumstances where the limited relief sought by
Muñoz would be available.

															III

															A “facially legitimate and bona fide” reason
may seem like a meager remedy for burdening a fundamental right.
Yet even the barest explanation requirement can be powerful. The
majority relies heavily on United States ex rel. Knauff v.
Shaughnessy, 338 U.S.
537 (1950). See ante, at 6–7, 13–14. A closer look at
the story of Ellen Knauff, however, illustrates the importance of
putting the Government to a minimal evidence requirement when a
visa denial burdens a constitutional right.

															Knauff ’s U. S. citizen husband sought
to bring her to the United States after they married during his
deployment to Germany. After this Court upheld her exclusion on
undisclosed national security grounds, there was a public outcry.
See C. Weisselberg, The Exclusion and Detention of Aliens: Lessons
From the Lives of Ellen Knauff and Ignatz Mezei, 143 U. Pa.
L. Rev. 933, 958–964 (1995). Both Houses of Congress
introduced private bills for her relief and, after the Attorney
General rushed to remove Knauff from Ellis Island before Congress
could act, Justice Jackson (who had vigorously dissented in the
case) issued a stay from this Court. See id., at 958,
n. 127. After extensive advocacy, the Attorney General ordered
immigration officials to reopen the case. See id., at
961–962. Eventually, Knauff won her case before the BIA when the
Government failed to prove up its national security concerns.
Id., at 963–964. She was finally admitted as a lawful
permanent resident. Id., at 964.

															The majority relies heavily on “[t]he rule of
Knauff ”: that “the Attorney General has the
unchallengeable power to exclude” a noncitizen. Ibid.;
ante, at 14 (emphasizing that “ ‘[n]o limits can be put
by the courts upon’ ” the exercise of the Government’s power
to “ ‘forbid aliens or classes of aliens from coming within
their borders’ ”). Yet, “the full story of Ellen Knauff shows
a populace and a Congress unwilling to accept the exercise of this
sort of raw power.” Weisselberg, 143 U. Pa. L. Rev., at
964. “Once the government was required to justify its exclusion
decision with substantial and reliable evidence, in an open
proceeding, Knauff gained admission into the United States.”
Ibid.

															Knauff brought her own habeas petition to
challenge her exclusion. Knauff, 338 U. S., at 539–540.
Her husband did not argue that her exclusion burdened his right to
marriage. Twenty-two years after Knauff, however, when faced
with such a challenge, this Court limited the justification that
the Government must provide in these circumstances to a “facially
legitimate and bona fide reason.” Mandel, 408 U. S., at
770. The majority, not content to resolve this case on even those
narrow grounds, instead relieves the Government of any need to
justify itself at all. Knauff ’s story illustrates why the
right to marriage deserves more. By leaving U. S. citizens
without even a factual basis for their spouses’ exclusion, the
majority paves the way for arbitrary denials of a right this Court
has repeatedly held among the most important to our Nation.

															*  *  *

															A traveler to the United States two centuries
ago reported that “ ‘[t]here is certainly no country in the
world where the tie of marriage is so much respected as in
America.’ ” Obergefell, 576 U. S., at 669 (quoting
1 A. de Tocqueville, Democracy in America 309 (H. Reeve transl.,
rev. ed. 1900)). Today, the majority fails to live up to that
centuries-old promise. Muñoz may be able to live with her husband
in El Salvador, but it will mean raising her U. S.-citizen
child outside the United States. Others will be less fortunate. The
burden will fall most heavily on same-sex couples and others who
lack the ability, for legal or financial reasons, to make a home in
the noncitizen spouse’s country of origin. For those couples, this
Court’s vision of marriage as the “assurance that while both still
live there will be someone to care for the other” rings hollow.
Obergefell, 576 U. S., at 667. I respectfully
dissent.

Notes
1
 The Government asked this
Court to review three questions: “1. Whether a consular officer’s
refusal of a visa to a U. S. citizen’s noncitizen spouse
impinges upon a constitutionally protected interest of the citizen.
“2. Whether, assuming that such a constitutional interest exists,
notifying a visa applicant that he was deemed inadmissible under 8
U. S. C. 1182(a)(3)(A)(ii) suffices to provide any
process that is due. “3. Whether, assuming that such a
constitutional interest exists and that citing Section
1182(a)(3)(A)(ii) is insufficient standing alone, due process
requires the government to provide a further factual basis for the
visa denial ‘within a reasonable time,’ or else forfeit the ability
to invoke consular nonreviewability in court.” Pet. for Cert. I.
This Court granted certiorari limited to the first and second
questions. 601 U. S. ___ (2024). The majority chooses to
decide this case on the first question presented rather than
“assuming that such a constitutional interest exists” and
determining what “process . . . is due” (the second
question presented). Pet. for Cert. I.
2
 As the majority notes, if
the consular officer denies admission based on “certain grounds
related to crime and national security,” a noncitizen is entitled
to “no explanation” at all. Ante, at 3 (citing 8
U. S. C. §1182(b)(3)).
3
 Unlike Justice Gorsuch, I
would vacate and remand the opinion below. The Court of Appeals and
District Court correctly resolved the two questions on which this
Court granted certiorari. The Ninth Circuit nevertheless vacated
the District Court’s judgment and remanded based on the answer to a
third question, which is not before this Court. See supra,
at 2, n. 1; 50 F. 4th 906, 923–924 (2022) (“Because no ‘fact
in the record’ justifying the denial of Asencio-Cordero’s visa was
made available to [Muñoz and her husband] until nearly three years
had elapsed after the denial, and until after litigation had begun,
we conclude that the government did not meet the notice
requirements of due process when it denied Asencio-Cordero’s
visa”). I would let the Ninth Circuit decide in the first instance
the effect of a Court holding that Muñoz received all the process
she was constitutionally due.
4
 Judges created this
doctrine because of the otherwise “strong presumption that Congress
intends judicial review of administrative action.” Bowen v.
Michigan Academy of Family Physicians, 476 U.S.
667, 670 (1986). The majority emphasizes that the Government
asked the Court for the holding it reaches today. See ante,
at 6, n. 3. It is hardly unusual for the Government to ask
this Court for less judicial review over its immigration decisions.
See, e.g., Wilkinson v. Garland, 601
U.S. 209 (2024) (arguing that eligibility for cancellation of
removal is unreviewable); Santos-Zacaria v. Garland,
598 U.S. 411 (2023) (arguing that noncitizens must request
discretionary forms of administrative review before challenging a
final order of removal in federal court); Patel v.
Garland, 596 U.S. 328 (2022) (arguing that federal courts
lack jurisdiction to review facts found as part of eligibility
determination for discretionary relief ); Garland v.
Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U.S. 543 (2022) (arguing that district
courts lack jurisdiction to entertain noncitizens’ requests for
class-wide injunctive relief ). Unusually, in this case, the
Government’s argument against review is not based on any statutes
passed by Congress but on a doctrine that this Court created
itself. Rather than exercise the restraint counseled by
Mandel, the majority instead chooses to exclude a
fundamental right from Mandel’s prudent exception. See
infra, at 16–19.
5
 Despite the majority’s
claim that its decision is the majority rule in the Courts of
Appeals, ante, at 8, and n. 5, lower courts have rarely
reached the question the majority reaches today. That is because
they have relied on Mandel to hold that the Government has
in any case provided a “ ‘facially legitimate and bona
fide’ ” reason. See, e.g., Sesay v.
United States, 984 F.3d 312, 315–316, and n. 2 (CA4
2021); Del Valle v. U. S. Dept. of State, 16 F.
4th 832, 838–842 (CA11 2021); Yafai v. Pompeo, 912
F.3d 1018, 1020–1021 (CA7 2019). One of the cases the majority
cites pre-dates Mandel, Silverman v. Rogers,
437 F.2d 102 (CA1 1970), and two others reached the majority’s
holding based only on conclusory assertions, see Burrafato
v. U. S. Dept. of State, 523 F.2d 554, 555–557 (CA2
1975); Bright v. Parra, 919 F.2d 31, 34 (CA5 1990)
(per curiam). Only two Circuits have used the
majority’s reasoning to hold that a U. S. citizen’s right to
marriage does not trigger the Mandel remedy. In one, the
court had an alternative holding that “even if we take [the right
to marriage] as a given, the argument fails because the consulate
provided a facially legitimate reason for the visa denials.”
Baaghil v. Miller, 1 F. 4th 427, 434 (CA6 2021). In
the other, a concurring judge urged his colleagues to resolve this
challenge on the same narrow holding that the majority could have
followed today. See, e.g., Colindres v.
United States Dept. of State, 71 F. 4th 1018, 1027 (CADC
2023) (opinion of Srinivasan, J.) (“There is no need for us to take
up the merits of [the] constitutional question . . . and
I would refrain from doing so. Rather, we can rest our decision
solely on the ground . . . that even assuming
[appellant’s] fundamental right to marriage includes a protected
interest in living in the country with her husband, such that at
least some form of due process scrutiny applies, the government’s
denial of a visa to him afforded her adequate
process”).


