::decision_cite:: 23-334
::decision_name::  Department of State v. Munoz
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–334

															_________________

															Department of State, et al., PETITIONERS
v. Sandra MuÑoz, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 21, 2024]

															Justice Barrett delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															Luis Asencio-Cordero seeks to enter the United
States to live with Sandra Muñoz, his wife. To obtain the necessary
visa, he submitted an application at the United States consulate in
San Salvador. A consular officer denied his application, however,
after finding that Asencio-Cordero is affiliated with MS–13, a
transnational criminal gang. Because of national security concerns,
the consular officer did not disclose the basis for his decision.
And because Asencio-Cordero, as a noncitizen, has no constitutional
right to enter the United States, he cannot elicit that information
or challenge the denial of his visa.

															Muñoz, on the other hand, is a citizen, and she
filed her own challenge to the consular officer’s decision. She
reasons as follows: The right to live with her noncitizen spouse in
the United States is implicit in the “liberty” protected by the
Fifth Amendment; the denial of her husband’s visa deprived her of
this interest, thereby triggering her right to due process; the
consular officer violated her right to due process by declining to
disclose the basis for finding Asencio-Cordero inadmissible; and
this, in turn, enables judicial review, even though visa denials
are ordinarily unreviewable by courts.

															Muñoz’s argument fails at the threshold. Her
argument is built on the premise that the right to bring her
noncitizen spouse to the United States is an unenumerated
constitutional right. To establish this premise, she must show that
the asserted right is “ ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s
history and tradition.’ ” Washington v.
Glucksberg, 521 U.S.
702, 720–721 (1997). She cannot make that showing. In fact,
Congress’s longstanding regulation of spousal immigration—including
through bars on admissibility—cuts the other way.

															I

															A

															To be admitted to the United States, a
noncitizen typically needs a visa. 66Stat. 181, 8
U. S. C. §1181(a). Visa decisions are made by the
political branches. Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667,
702–703 (2018); see also Oceanic Steam Nav. Co. v.
Stranahan, 214 U.S.
320, 339 (1909) (explaining that “over no conceivable subject
is the legislative power of Congress more complete”). As a general
matter, Congress sets the terms for entry, and the Department of
State implements those requirements at United States Embassies and
consulates in foreign countries.[1]

															Congress has streamlined the visa process for
noncitizens with immediate relatives in the United States. The
citizen-relative must first file a petition with U. S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), an agency housed
within the Department of Homeland Security, to have the noncitizen
classified as an immediate relative. See Scialabba v.
Cuellar de Osorio, 573 U.S.
41, 46–47 (2014) (plurality opinion); §§1151(b)(2)(A)(i),
1154(a)(1)(A). If USCIS approves the petition, then the noncitizen
may apply for a visa. §§1201(a), 1202(a). As part of this process,
the noncitizen submits written materials and interviews with a
consular officer abroad. §§1201(a)(1), 1202.

															Ordinarily, a consular officer who denies a visa
application “because the officer determines the alien to be
inadmissible” must “provide the alien with a timely written notice
that . . . (A) states the determination, and (B) lists
the specific provision or provisions of law under which the alien
is inadmissible.” §1182(b)(1). The statute requires no explanation,
however, “to any alien inadmissible” on certain grounds related to
crime and national security. §1182(b)(3). This case involves a
noncitizen to whom this statutory exception applies.

															B

															Sandra Muñoz, an American citizen, married
Luis Asencio-Cordero, a Salvadoran citizen, in 2010. Several years
later, the couple began taking steps to obtain an immigrant visa
for Asencio-Cordero. Muñoz filed a petition to classify her husband
as an immediate relative, which USCIS granted. §§1151(b)(2)(A)(i),
1154(a)(1)(A). Because Asencio-Cordero had entered the United
States unlawfully, he was required to return to El Salvador and
submit his visa application at a consulate there. See §§1154(b),
1202; 22 CFR §42. He met with a consular officer in San Salvador
and underwent several interviews.

															In December 2015, the officer denied
Asencio-Cordero’s application, citing 8 U. S. C.
§1182(a)(3)(A)(ii). That provision renders inadmissible a
noncitizen whom the officer “knows, or has reasonable ground to
believe, seeks to enter the United States to engage solely,
principally, or incidentally in” certain specified offenses or “any
other unlawful activity.” Ibid. The officer provided no
additional details—but, given the reason for the visa denial, even
the statutory citation was more information than Asencio-Cordero
was entitled to receive. §1182(b)(3).

															Asencio-Cordero guessed (as it turns out,
accurately) that he was denied a visa based on a finding that he
was a member of MS–13, a transnational criminal gang. He also
guessed (again, accurately) that this finding was based at least in
part on the conclusion that his tattoos signified gang membership.
Asencio-Cordero and Muñoz denied that Asencio-Cordero was
affiliated with MS–13 or any other gang, and they pressed the
consulate to reconsider the officer’s finding. When the consulate
held firm, they appealed to the Department of State, submitting
evidence that the tattoos were innocent. A Department official
informed Asencio-Cordero and Muñoz that the Department agreed with
the consulate’s determination. The next day, the consul in San
Salvador notified them that Asencio-Cordero’s application had gone
through multiple rounds of review—including by the consular
officer, consular supervisors, the consul himself, the Bureau of
Consular Affairs, and the State Department’s Immigration Visa
Unit—and none of these reviews had “ ‘revealed any grounds to
change the finding of inadmissibilty.’ ” App. 7.

															Asencio-Cordero and Muñoz sued the Department of
State, the Secretary of State, and the United States consul in San
Salvador. (For simplicity’s sake, we will refer to the defendants
collectively as the State Department.) They alleged, among other
things, that the State Department had abridged Muñoz’s
constitutional liberty interest in her husband’s visa application
by failing to give a sufficient reason why Asencio-Cordero is
inadmissible under the “unlawful activity” bar.

															The District Court agreed and ordered discovery.
In a sworn declaration, an attorney adviser from the State
Department explained that Asencio-Cordero was deemed inadmissible
because he belonged to MS–13. The finding was “based on the
in-person interview, a criminal review of . . .
Asencio[-]Cordero, and a review of [his] tattoos.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 124a. In addition to the affidavit, the State Department
provided the District Court with confidential law enforcement
information, which it reviewed in camera, identifying
Ascencio-Cordero as a member of MS–13. Satisfied, the District
Court granted summary judgment to the State Department.

															The Ninth Circuit vacated the judgment and
remanded the case. Consistent with circuit precedent, it held that
Muñoz, as a citizen, had a constitutionally protected liberty
interest in her husband’s visa application. Because of that
interest, the Ninth Circuit said, the Due Process Clause required
the State Department to give Muñoz a “ ‘facially legitimate
and bona fide reason’ ” for denying her husband’s visa. 50
F. 4th 906, 916 (2022) (quoting Kleindienst v.
Mandel, 408 U.S.
753, 766–770 (1972)). The initial statutory citation did not
qualify, 50 F. 4th, at 917–918, and the later affidavit was
untimely, id., at 921–922. Delay carried a serious
consequence for the State Department. Visa denials are insulated
from judicial review by the doctrine of consular nonreviewability.
But the Ninth Circuit held that by declining to give Muñoz more
information earlier in the process, the State Department had
forfeited its entitlement “to shield its visa decision from
judicial review.” Id., at 924. The panel remanded for the
District Court to consider the merits of Muñoz’s suit, which
include a request for a declaration invalidating the finding that
Asencio-Cordero is inadmissible and an order demanding that the
State Department readjudicate Asencio-Cordero’s
application.[2]

															The Ninth Circuit denied en banc review over the
dissent of 10 judges, and we granted the State Department’s
petition for certiorari. 601 U. S. ___ (2024).[3]

															II

															“For more than a century, this Court has
recognized that the admission and exclusion of foreign nationals is
a ‘fundamental sovereign attribute exercised by the Government’s
political departments largely immune from judicial control.’ ”
Trump, 585 U. S., at 702 (quoting Fiallo v.
Bell, 430 U.S.
787, 792 (1977)). Congress may delegate to executive officials
the discretionary authority to admit noncitizens “immune from
judicial inquiry or interference.” Harisiades v.
Shaughnessy, 342 U.S.
580, 588–591 (1952). When it does so, the action of an
executive officer “to admit or to exclude an alien” “is final and
conclusive.” United States ex rel. Knauff v.
Shaughnessy, 338 U.S.
537, 543 (1950); see also Dept. of Homeland Security v.
Thuraissigiam, 591 U.S. 103, 138–139 (2020); Mandel,
408 U. S., at 765–766; Nishimura Ekiu v. United
States, 142 U.S.
651, 659–660 (1892). The Judicial Branch has no role to play
“unless expressly authorized by law.” Knauff, 338
U. S., at 543. The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) does
not authorize judicial review of a consular officer’s denial of a
visa; thus, as a rule, the federal courts cannot review those
decisions.[4] This principle is
known as the doctrine of consular nonreviewability.

															We have assumed that a narrow exception to this
bar exists “when the denial of a visa allegedly burdens the
constitutional rights of a U. S. citizen.” Trump, 585
U. S., at 703. In that event, the Court has considered whether
the Executive gave a “ ‘facially legitimate and bona fide
reason’ ” for denying the visa. Kerry v. Din,
576 U.S.
86, 103–104 (2015) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment)
(quoting Mandel, 408 U. S., at 770). If so, the inquiry
is at an end—the Court has disclaimed the authority to “ ‘look
behind the exercise of that discretion,’ ” much less to
balance the reason given against the asserted constitutional right.
Din, 576 U. S., at 104.

															Asencio-Cordero cannot invoke the exception
himself, because he has no “constitutional right of entry to this
country as a nonimmigrant or otherwise.” Mandel, 408
U. S., at 762. Thus, so far as Asencio-Cordero is concerned,
the doctrine of consular nonreviewability applies. Muñoz, however,
is an American citizen, and she asserts that the denial of her
husband’s visa violated her constitutional rights, thereby
enabling judicial review. Specifically, she argues that the State
Department abridged her fundamental right to live with her spouse
in her country of citizenship—and that it did so without affording
her the fair procedure guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment.

															The Ninth Circuit is the only Court of Appeals
to have embraced this asserted right—every other Circuit to
consider the issue has rejected it.[5] See Colindres v. U. S. Dept. of
State, 71 F. 4th 1018, 1021 (CADC 2023); Baaghil v.
Miller, 1 F. 4th 427, 433 (CA6 2021); Bakran v.
Secretary, U. S. Dept. of Homeland Security, 894 F.3d
557, 564 (CA3 2018); Bright v. Parra, 919 F.2d 31, 34
(CA5 1990) (per curiam); Burrafato v.
U. S. Dept. of State, 523 F.2d 554, 554–557 (CA2 1975);
Silverman v. Rogers, 437 F.2d 102, 107 (CA1 1970). In
Din, this Court considered but did not resolve the question.
A plurality concluded that a citizen does not have a fundamental
right to bring her noncitizen spouse to the United States. 576
U. S., at 96. Two Justices chose not to reach the issue,
explaining that even if the right existed, the statutory citation
provided by the Executive qualified as a facially legitimate and
bona fide reason. Id., at 105 (opinion of
Kennedy, J.). Since Din, the existence of the right has
continued to divide the Circuits.

															Today, we resolve the open question. Like the
Din plurality, we hold that a citizen does not have a
fundamental liberty interest in her noncitizen spouse being
admitted to the country.

															III

															The Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment
requires the Government to provide due process of law before it
deprives someone of “life, liberty, or property.” Under our
precedent, the Clause promises more than fair process: It also
“provides heightened protection against government interference
with certain fundamental rights and liberty interests.”
Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 720. When a fundamental right
is at stake, the Government can act only by narrowly tailored means
that serve a compelling state interest. Id., at 721.
Identifying unenumerated rights carries a serious risk of judicial
overreach, so this Court “exercise[s] the utmost care whenever we
are asked to break new ground in this field.” Id., at 720
(internal quotation marks omitted). To that end,
Glucksberg’s two-step inquiry disciplines the substantive
due process analysis. First, it insists on a “careful description
of the asserted fundamental liberty interest.” Id., at 721
(internal quotation marks omitted). Second, it stresses that “the
Due Process Clause specially protects” only “those fundamental
rights and liberties which are, objectively, deeply rooted in this
Nation’s history and tradition.” Id., at 720–721 (internal
quotation marks omitted).

															We start with a “careful description of the
asserted fundamental liberty interest.” Id., at 721
(internal quotation marks omitted). Muñoz invokes the “fundamental
right of marriage,” but the State Department does not deny that
Muñoz (who is already married) has a fundamental right to marriage.
Muñoz claims something distinct: the right to reside with her
noncitizen spouse in the United States. That involves more than
marriage and more than spousal cohabitation—it includes the right
to have her noncitizen husband enter (and remain in) the United
States.

															It is difficult to pin down the nature of the
right Muñoz claims. The logic of her position suggests an
entitlement to bring Asencio-Cordero to the United States—how else
could Muñoz enjoy the asserted right to live with her noncitizen
husband in her country of citizenship? See also Brief for
Petitioners 23, n. 8 (characterizing Muñoz’s claim as an
“entitle[ment] to the visa itself ”). Yet Muñoz disclaims that
characterization, insisting that “[she] does not advance a
substantive right to immigrate one’s spouse.” Brief for Respondents
19, n. 10. This concession is wise, because such a claim would
ordinarily trigger strict scrutiny—and it would be remarkable to
put the Government to the most demanding test in constitutional law
in the field of immigration, an area unsuited to rigorous judicial
oversight. Fiallo, 430 U. S., at 792 (“Our cases ‘have
long recognized the power to expel or exclude aliens as a
fundamental sovereign attribute exercised by the Government’s
political departments largely immune from judicial
control’ ”).

															Though understandable, Muñoz’s concession makes
characterizing the asserted right a conceptually harder task. Here
is her formulation: a “marital right . . . sufficiently
important that it cannot be unduly burdened without procedural due
process as to an inadmissibility finding that would block her from
residing with her spouse in her country of citizenship.” Brief for
Respondents 19, n. 10. So described, the asserted right is
neither fish nor fowl. It is fundamental enough to be implicit in
“liberty;” but, unlike other implied fundamental rights, its
deprivation does not trigger strict scrutiny. See Din, 576
U. S., at 99 (plurality opinion) (observing that this argument
posits “two categories of implied rights protected by the Due
Process Clause: really fundamental rights, which cannot be taken
away at all absent a compelling state interest; and not-so-
fundamental rights, which can be taken away so long as procedural
due process is observed”). This right would be in a category of
one: a substantive due process right that gets only procedural due
process protection. Ibid.

															We need not decide whether such a category
exists, because Muñoz cannot clear the second step of
Glucksberg’s test: demonstrating that the right to bring a
noncitizen spouse to the United States is “ ‘deeply rooted in
this Nation’s history and tradition.’ ” 521 U. S., at
721. On the contrary, the through line of history is recognition of
the Government’s sovereign authority to set the terms governing the
admission and exclusion of noncitizens. And Muñoz points to no
subsidiary tradition that curbs this authority in the case of
noncitizen spouses.

															From the beginning, the admission of noncitizens
into the country was characterized as “of favor [and] not of
right.” J. Madison, Report of 1800 (Jan. 7, 1800), in 17 Papers
of James Madison 319 (D. Mattern, J. Stagg, J. Cross, & S.
Perdue eds. 1991) (emphasis added); see also 2 Records of the
Federal Convention of 1787, p. 238 (M. Farrand ed. 1911)
(recounting Gouverneur Morris’s observation that “every Society
from a great nation down to a club ha[s] the right of declaring the
conditions on which new members should be admitted”); Debate on
Virginia Resolutions, in The Virginia Report of 1799–1800,
p. 31 (1850) (“[B]y the law of nations, it is left in the
power of all states to take such measures about the admission of
strangers as they think convenient”). Consistent with this view,
the 1798 Act Concerning Aliens gave the President complete
discretion to remove “all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous
to the peace and safety of the United States.” 1Stat. 571 (emphasis
deleted). The Act made no exception for spouses—or, for that
matter, other family members.

															The United States had relatively open borders
until the late 19th century. But once Congress began to restrict
immigration, “it enacted a complicated web of regulations that
erected serious impediments to a person’s ability to bring a spouse
into the United States.” Din, 576 U. S., at 96
(plurality opinion). One of the first federal immigration statutes,
the Immigration Act of 1882, required executive officials to
“examine” noncitizens and deny “permi[ssion] to land” to “any
convict, lunatic, idiot, or any person unable to take care of
himself or herself without becoming a public charge.” 22Stat. 214.
The Act provided no exception for citizens’ spouses. And when
Congress drafted a successor statute that expanded the grounds of
inadmissibility, it again gave no special treatment to the marital
relationship. Immigration Act of 1891, ch. 551, 26Stat. 1084.

															There are other examples. The Page Act of 1875,
which functioned as a restriction on Chinese female immigration,
contained no exception for wives. 18Stat. 477–478; see
Colindres, 71 F. 4th, at 1023. Or consider the
Emergency Quota Act of 1921, which capped the number of immigrants
permitted to enter the country each year. 42Stat. 5–6. Although the
Act gave preferential treatment to citizens’ wives, “once all the
quota spots were filled for the year, the spouse was barred without
exception.” Din, 576 U. S., at 97 (plurality
opinion).[6] See also C.
Bredbenner, A Nationality of Her Own: Women, Marriage, and the Law
of Citizenship 115 (1998) (“[C]itizens’ wives were still quota
immigrants, and immigration officials could regulate their entry
closely if economic or other circumstances prompted a general
tightening of admission”). In 1924, Congress, showing favor to men
rather than marriage, lifted the quotas for male citizens with
noncitizen wives, but did not similarly clear the way for female
citizens with noncitizen husbands. Abrams 12. This gender disparity
did not change until 1952. Id., at 13–14.

															That is not to say that Congress has not
extended special treatment to marriage—it has. For instance, the
War Brides Act of 1945 provided that the noncitizen spouses of
World War II veterans would be exempt from certain admissibility
bars and documentary requirements. Ch. 591, 59Stat. 659. Closer to
home, Asencio-Cordero’s visa application rested on his marriage to
Muñoz, which made him eligible for immigrant status. §1154. But
while Congress has made it easier for spouses to immigrate, it has
never made spousal immigration a matter of right. On the contrary,
qualifications and restrictions have long been the norm. See,
e.g., Act of Aug. 9, 1946, ch. 945, 60Stat. 975 (granting
nonquota status to Chinese wives of American citizens, but only for
those with longstanding marriages).

															Of particular relevance to Muñoz, Congress has
not exempted spouses from inadmissibility restrictions like the
INA’s unlawful-activity bar. Precusors to that bar have existed
since the early 20th century. For example, the Immigration Act of
1917 provided for the exclusion of “persons who have been convicted
of or admit having committed a felony or other crime or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.” Ch. 29, 39Stat. 875. Consular officers
applied this bar to spouses, and courts refused to review those
visa denials, citing the doctrine of consular nonreviewability.
See, e.g., United States ex rel. Ulrich v.
Kellogg, 30 F.2d 984, 985–986 (CADC 1929).

															United States ex rel. Knauff v.
Shaughnessy is a striking example from this Court. In
Knauff, a United States citizen (and World War II veteran)
found himself similarly situated to Muñoz: His noncitizen wife was
denied admission for security reasons, based on “information of a
confidential nature, the disclosure of which would be prejudicial
to the public interest.” 338 U. S., at 541, 544. We held that
the War Brides Act did not supersede the statute on which the
Attorney General had relied. Id., at 546–547 (“There is
nothing in the War Brides Act . . . to indicate that it
was the purpose of Congress, by partially suspending compliance
with certain requirements and quota provisions of the immigration
laws, to relax the security provisions of the immigration laws”).
So, “[a]s all other aliens, petitioner had to stand the test of
security.” Id., at 547. Nor was she entitled to a hearing,
because “[w]hatever the procedure authorized by Congress is, it is
due process as far as an alien denied entry is concerned.”
Id., at 544. The Attorney General’s decision was “final and
conclusive,” and he did not have to divulge the reason for it.
Id., at 543.[7]

															Knauff thus reaffirmed the longstanding
principle “that the United States can, as a matter of public policy
. . . forbid aliens or classes of aliens from coming
within their borders,” and “[n]o limits can be put by the courts
upon” that power. Wong Wing v. United States,
163 U.S.
228, 237 (1896). Congress’s authority to “formulat[e]
. . . policies” concerning the entry of noncitizens “has
become about as firmly imbedded in the legislative and judicial
tissues of our body politic as any aspect of our government,”
representing “not merely ‘a page of history,’ but a whole volume.”
Galvan v. Press, 347 U.S.
522, 531 (1954) (citation omitted). “[T]he Court’s general
reaffirmations of this principle have been legion.” Mandel,
408 U. S., at 765–766; see also id., at 765 (“[T]he
power to exclude aliens is ‘inherent in sovereignty, necessary for
maintaining normal international relations and defending the
country against foreign encroachments and dangers—a power to be
exercised exclusively by the political branches of
government’ ”).[8] While
“families of putative immigrants certainly have an interest in
their admission,” it is a “fallacy” to leap from that premise to
the conclusion that United States citizens have a
“ ‘fundamental right’ ” that can limit how Congress
exercises “the Nation’s sovereign power to admit or exclude
foreigners.” Fiallo, 430 U. S., at 795, n. 6.

															To be sure, Congress can use its authority over
immigration to prioritize the unity of the immigrant family.
Din, 576 U. S., at 97 (plurality opinion). See,
e.g., §1151(b)(2)(A)(i) (exempting “immediate relatives”
from certain numerical quotas). It has frequently done just that.
But the Constitution does not require this result; moreover,
Congress’s generosity with respect to spousal immigration has
always been subject to restrictions, including bars on
admissibility. This is an area in which more than family unity is
at play: Other issues, including national security and foreign
policy, matter too. Thus, while Congress may show special
solicitude to noncitizen spouses, such solicitude is “a matter of
legislative grace rather than fundamental right.” Din, 576
U. S., at 97 (plurality opinion). Muñoz has pointed to no
evidence suggesting otherwise.[9]

															IV

															As the State Department observes, Muñoz’s
claim to a procedural due process right in someone else’s
legal proceeding would have unsettling collateral consequences.
Consider where her logic leads: Could a wife challenge her
husband’s “assignment to a remote prison or to an overseas military
deployment, even though prisoners and service members themselves
cannot bring such challenges”? Reply Brief 13. Could a citizen
assert procedural rights in the removal proceeding of her spouse?
Brief for Petitioners 30. Muñoz’s position would usher in a new
strain of constitutional law, for the Constitution does not
ordinarily prevent the government from taking actions that
“indirectly or incidentally” burden a citizen’s legal rights.
Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 545
U.S. 748, 767 (2005) (quoting O’Bannon v. Town Court
Nursing Center, 447 U.S.
773, 788 (1980)).

															Our decision in O’Bannon is illustrative.
There, a group of nursing-home residents alleged that the
government had violated their liberty interests when it decertified
their nursing home without providing them a hearing. 447
U. S., at 777–781, 784. We acknowledged that the residents
would suffer harm from the government’s decision. Id., at
784, and n. 16. But we held that absent a “direct restraint on
[their liberty],” the decision did not implicate their due process
rights. Id., at 788. The decertification decision imposed
only an indirect harm. We explained that the residents were
akin to “members of a family who have been dependent on an errant
father.” Ibid. Although “they may suffer serious trauma if
he is deprived of his liberty or property as a consequence of
criminal proceedings,” such family members “surely . . .
have no constitutional right to participate in his trial or
sentencing procedures.” Ibid. The same principle governs
here. Muñoz has suffered harm from the denial of Asencio-Cordero’s
visa application, but that harm does not give her a constitutional
right to participate in his consular process.

															Lest there be any doubt, Mandel does
not hold that citizens have procedural due process rights in
the visa proceedings of others. The Ninth Circuit seems to have
read Mandel that way, but that is a misreading.

															In Mandel, the Attorney General refused
to waive inadmissibility and grant Ernest Mandel, a self-described
“ ‘revolutionary Marxist,’ ” a temporary visa to attend
academic conferences in the United States. 408 U. S., at 756.
A group of professors sued on the ground that the Executive’s
discretion to grant a waiver was limited by their First Amendment
right to hear Mandel speak; they insisted that “the First Amendment
claim should prevail, at least where no justification is advanced
for denial of a waiver.” Id., at 769. In response, the
Attorney General asserted that “Congress has delegated the waiver
decision to the Executive in its sole and unfettered discretion,
and any reason or no reason may be given.” Ibid.

															But because “the Attorney General did
inform Mandel’s counsel of the reason for refusing him a waiver,”
the Court chose not to resolve this statutory argument.
Ibid. (emphasis added). Instead, it said that so long as the
Executive gives a “facially legitimate and bona fide reason” for
denying a waiver under §212(a)(28) of the INA—the statutory
provision at issue—“the courts will neither look behind the
exercise of that discretion, nor test it by balancing its
justification against the First Amendment interests of those who
seek personal communication with the applicant.” Id., at
770. The Court expressly declined to address whether a
constitutional challenge would “be available for attacking [an]
exercise of discretion for which no justification whatsoever is
advanced.” Ibid.

															Thus, the “facially legitimate and bona fide
reason” in Mandel was the justification for avoiding a
difficult question of statutory interpretation; it had nothing to
do with procedural due process. Indeed, a procedural due process
claim was not even before the Court. The professors argued that the
denial of Mandel’s visa directly deprived them of their First
Amendment rights, not that their First Amendment rights
entitled them to procedural protections in Mandel’s visa
application process. Id., at 754. To make an argument
logically analogous to that of the professors, Muñoz would have to
claim that the denial of Asencio-Cordero’s visa violated her
substantive due process right to bring her noncitizen spouse to the
United States—thereby triggering the State Department’s obligation
to demonstrate why denying him the visa is the least restrictive
means of serving the Government’s interest in national security.
But, as we have explained, Muñoz has disavowed that argument, which
cannot succeed in any event because the asserted right is not a
longstanding and “ ‘deeply rooted’ ” tradition in this
country. Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721.

															The bottom line is that procedural due process
is an odd vehicle for Muñoz’s argument, and Mandel does not
support it. Whatever else it may stand for, Mandel does not
hold that a citizen’s independent constitutional right (say, a free
speech claim) gives that citizen a procedural due process right to
a “facially legitimate and bona fide reason” for why someone else’s
visa was denied. And Muñoz is not constitutionally entitled to one
here.

															*  *  *

															The judgment of the Ninth Circuit is reversed,
and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with
this opinion.

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 We describe the process
for noncitizens who, like Asencio-Cordero, have not yet been
lawfully admitted to the United States and must therefore apply
from abroad. Compare 8 U. S. C. §1255(a) (adjustment of
status to lawful permanent resident for noncitizens already
admitted into the United States) with 22 CFR §§42.61, 42.62 (2023)
(noncitizens applying for immigrant visa must appear in person
before consular officer in consular district of
residence).
2
 At oral argument in this
Court, Muñoz suggested that she is asserting a constitutional
entitlement only to information—a “facially legitimate and bona
fide reason” why the consular officer deemed her husband
inadmissible under the “unlawful activity” bar. Tr. of Oral Arg.
59–64. Elsewhere, though, she suggests that the Due Process Clause
entitles her to both the information and “a meaningful opportunity
to respond.” Brief for Respondents 11. If appeal is no longer
available under State Department regulations (and the Ninth Circuit
said it was not), Muñoz presumably seeks what she sought below:
judicial review of the inadmissibility finding and a court order
requiring the State Department to reconsider Asencio-Cordero’s visa
application. 50 F. 4th, at 912, n. 14. This level of
judicial involvement in the visa process would be a significant
extension of our precedent. The dissent, however, would remand to
the Ninth Circuit for consideration of this relief. Post, at
10, n. 2 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.).
3
 Inexplicably, the dissent
claims that the Court is reaching out improperly to settle this
issue. Post, at 2. We granted certiorari on this very
question to resolve a longstanding circuit split. 601 U. S.
___ (2024). And we did so at the request of the Solicitor General,
who emphasized both the Government’s need for uniformity in the
administration of immigration law and the importance of this issue
to national security. Pet. for Cert. 27–28, 31–33.
4
 In Trump v.
Hawaii, the plaintiffs argued that a proclamation excluding
certain classes of noncitizens from entering the United States
exceeded the President’s authority under the Immigration and
Nationality Act. 585 U.S. 667, 681–682 (2018). The Court explained
that the doctrine of consular nonreviewability is not
jurisdictional and “assume[d] without deciding that [the]
plaintiffs’ statutory claims [were] reviewable.” Id., at
682–683.
5
 The dissent characterizes
our decision today as extreme, post, at 14, but it is the
dissent who embraces the outlier position: Our opinion is in line
with the vast majority of Circuits that have decided this question.
The dissent aligns itself with the lone Circuit going the other
way.
6
 Given the then-existing
law of coverture, the Act was only relevant to noncitizen wives—a
citizen wife with a noncitizen husband was forced to assume her
husband’s nationality. K. Abrams, What Makes the Family Special? 80
U. Chi. L. Rev. 7, 11 (2013) (Abrams). (“Giving wives the
opportunity to sponsor their husbands would have been nonsensical;
under the Expatriation Act of 1907, a wife automatically
lost her US citizenship upon marrying a foreigner, so there
could be no such thing as a US citizen wife with an immigrant
husband” (footnotes omitted)). This changed in 1922, when the Cable
Act “largely undid derivative citizenship for married women.”
Ibid.
7
 The dissent criticizes
Knauff because the Attorney General, under pressure from
Congress, ultimately revisited his decision and admitted Knauff as
a lawful permanent resident. Post, at 19. But the history of
the case does not establish that the Court was wrong to decline to
review the Attorney General’s decision. It reflects a decision that
was made by the political branches and reversed through the
political process. Moreover, Knauff remains good law that we
have repeatedly reaffirmed. Dept. of Homeland Security v.
Thuraissigiam, 591 U.S. 103, 138–139 (2020).
8
 The dissent barely
acknowledges that any of this precedent exists. In fact, rather
than recognizing the prerogatives of the political branches in this
area, the dissent criticizes the United States’ immigration policy,
post, at 4–5, as well as the competence of the Executive
Branch officials who make difficult, high-stakes decisions about
which noncitizens seeking entry to the United States pose a threat
to national security, post, at 6–7. Perhaps our dissenting
colleagues are well-equipped to set immigration policy and manage
border security, but the Constitution entrusts those tasks to the
political branches.
9
 The dissent never
addresses the actual issue in this case, which is whether the
Judiciary has any authority to review visa determinations made by
the State Department. Instead, the dissent chooses the rhetorically
easier path of charging the Court with endangering the fundamental
right to marriage. See post, at 11–14. To be clear: Today’s
decision does not remotely call into question any precedent of this
Court, including those protecting marriage as a fundamental right.
By contrast, the dissent would upend more than a century’s worth of
this Court’s precedent regarding the doctrine of consular
nonreviewability, not to mention equally longstanding congressional
and Executive Branch practice. Ibid.


