::decision_cite:: 23-50
::decision_name::  Chiaverini v. City of Napoleon
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–50

															_________________

															Jascha Chiaverini, et al., PETITIONERS
v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the sixth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Alito joins,
dissenting.

															Jascha Chiaverini sued several city officials
for damages under 42 U. S. C. §1983. He alleged that they
violated his Fourth Amendment rights by subjecting him to a
malicious prosecution. I continue to adhere to my belief that a
“malicious prosecution claim cannot be based on the Fourth
Amendment.” Manuel v. Joliet, 580 U.S. 357, 378
(2017) (Alito, J., joined by Thomas, J., dissenting). Accordingly,
I would affirm the dismissal of Chiaverini’s claim.

															To raise a successful claim under §1983, a
plaintiff must allege the deprivation of “rights, privileges, or
immunities secured” to him by the Constitution. 42
U. S. C. §1983. “In order to flesh out the elements of
th[e alleged] constitutional tort,” the Court generally analogizes
to common-law torts. Manuel, 580 U. S., at 378 (opinion
of Alito, J.); see also Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S.
477, 483–484 (1994). In this case, Chiaverini claims that he
was seized without probable cause in violation of the Fourth
Amendment. Chiaverini principally relies on this Court’s decision
in Thompson v. Clark, 596 U.S. 36 (2022), to argue
that the appropriate tort analog for this claim is malicious
prosecution. In Thompson, the Court held that malicious
prosecution, a tort addressing “the wrongful initiation of charges
without probable cause,” is most analogous to a Fourth Amendment
unreasonable-seizure claim. Id., at 43.

															Thompson was wrongly decided. A
malicious-prosecution claim bears little resemblance to an
unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment. Consider what is
required to establish a claim of malicious prosecution. A plaintiff
must show that “(i) the suit or proceeding was ‘instituted without
any probable cause’; (ii) the ‘motive in instituting’ the suit ‘was
malicious,’ . . . ; and (iii) the prosecution
‘terminated in the acquittal or discharge of the accused.’ ”
Id., at 44 (quoting T. Cooley, Law of Torts 181 (1880)).
These elements have no overlap with what is required to establish a
Fourth Amendment seizure violation.

															First, an unreasonable seizure can occur without
any prosecution—for instance, if a person “is arrested without
probable cause” and “released before any charges are filed.” 596
U. S., at 51–52 (Alito, J., dissenting). Second, an
unreasonable seizure does not depend on the seizing official’s
motives. “[W]hile subjective bad faith, i.e., malice,
is the core element of a malicious prosecution claim, it is firmly
established that the Fourth Amendment standard of reasonableness is
fundamentally objective.” Manuel, 580 U. S., at 379
(opinion of Alito, J.). Thus, “[i]f a law enforcement officer makes
an arrest without probable cause, the arrest is unreasonable
and therefore unconstitutional even if the officer harbors no ill
will for the arrestee. Likewise, if an officer makes an arrest
with probable cause, there is no Fourth Amendment violation
regardless of the ‘actual motivations of the individual officers
involved.’ ” Thompson, 596 U. S., at 52 (opinion
of Alito, J.) (quoting Whren v. United States,
517 U.S.
806, 813 (1996)). Third, an unreasonable seizure violates the
Constitution regardless of how any subsequent prosecution is
resolved. See Manuel, 580 U. S., at 379 (opinion of
Alito, J.).

															Nor is an unreasonable seizure necessary to
prove a malicious-prosecution claim. A malicious prosecution can
occur without any seizure at all. For example, “[t]here are cases
in which defendants charged with nonviolent crimes agree to appear
for arraignment and are then released pending trial on their own
recognizance. These defendants . . . may bring a
common-law suit for malicious prosecution . . . ,
but they are not seized.” Thompson, 596 U. S., at
52–53. And, “since a malicious-prosecution claim does not require a
seizure, it obviously does not require proof that the person
bringing suit was seized without probable cause.” Id., at
53.

															Malicious prosecution is therefore not an
appropriate tort analog for a §1983 claim alleging a seizure in
violation of the Fourth Amendment. The Court has never provided a
fulsome explanation for why it has concluded otherwise. When the
Court first recognized a malicious-prosecution claim under the
Fourth Amendment in Thompson, it essentially adopted the
holdings of certain lower courts. Id., at 43. The Court
offered two meager sentences to justify doing so. It reasoned that
“the gravamen of the Fourth Amendment claim for malicious
prosecution . . . is the wrongful initiation of charges
without probable cause. And the wrongful initiation of charges
without probable cause is likewise the gravamen of the tort of
malicious prosecution.” Ibid. That is incorrect. A
malicious-prosecution claim protects against the malicious
initiation of charges, but the Fourth Amendment protects against
unreasonable searches and seizures—it does not matter whether the
official acted with malice or charges are ever initiated. See
id., at 54–55 (opinion of Alito, J.). Today, the Court rests
solely on Thompson’s mistaken reasoning to conclude that
Chiaverini can raise his claim. See ante, at 4–5.

															The Court’s decision to forge ahead with
combining the malicious-prosecution and Fourth Amendment frameworks
will inevitably create confusion. As I have explained, an
unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment requires a seizure;
a malicious-prosecution claim does not. Supra, at 2. To
resolve this mismatch, the Court has decided that a plaintiff must
show that a malicious prosecution caused an unreasonable seizure.
See Thompson, 596 U. S., at 43, n. 2; ante,
at 1, 7. While that grafting solved one problem, it created several
more. Because the Court has mixed two distinct legal frameworks, it
is unclear what doctrines actually govern its requirement that a
malicious prosecution cause a seizure. For example, if a plaintiff
has multiple charges, how does a court determine whether a
particular unfounded charge caused the seizure? See ante, at
7 (listing three possible causation theories). What type of
evidence is relevant? See Brief for Petitioners 40 (arguing that
Chiaverini would not have been seized absent the unfounded charge
since a similar defendant with a credible charge was not seized).
And, what happens if an unfounded charge merely changes the
nature of the seizure? See Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 18 (arguing that an unfounded charge causes a
seizure if it results in a more forceful arrest). The Court’s claim
for malicious prosecution under the Fourth Amendment requires
resolving these questions and more. To date, the Court has offered
little guidance on how to do so.[1]* And, because the claim at issue is the Court’s own
creation, lower courts cannot turn to the common law or Fourth
Amendment doctrine for answers. Instead, they are left to make
their best guess at how the Court would define its novel claim.

															I would take a far simpler course. Instead of
forcing a square peg into a round hole by judging an unreasonable
seizure based on the malicious-prosecution tort, I would “hold that
a malicious-prosecution claim may not be brought under the Fourth
Amendment.” Thompson, 596 U. S., at 60 (opinion of
Alito, J.). I respectfully dissent.

Notes
1
*The Court purports to offer
some guidance today by rejecting the Sixth Circuit’s “categorical
rule barring a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim if any
charge is valid.” Ante, at 6–7. But, it is not clear that
the Sixth Circuit even has such a rule. See Howse v.
Hodous, 953 F.3d 402, 409, n. 3 (2020) (recognizing
that the underlying inquiry is whether an unfounded charge
“change[s] the nature of the seizure”); see 2023 WL 152477, *4
(Jan. 11, 2023) (citing Howse). It is thus unclear what, if
any, doctrinal progress today’s decision makes.


