::decision_cite:: 23-5572
::decision_name::  Fischer v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–5572

															_________________

															JOSEPH W. FISCHER, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															[June 28, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, concurring.

															On January 6, 2021, an angry mob stormed the
United States Capitol seeking to prevent Congress from fulfilling
its constitutional duty to certify the electoral votes in the 2020
Presidential election. See ante, at 1–2. The peaceful
transfer of power is a fundamental democratic norm, and those who
attempted to disrupt it in this way inflicted a deep wound on this
Nation. But today’s case is not about the immorality of those acts.
Instead, the question before this Court is far narrower: What is
the scope of the particular crime Congress has outlined in 18
U. S. C. §1512(c)(2)?

															In the United States of America, “men are not
subjected to criminal punishment because their conduct offends our
patriotic emotions or thwarts a general purpose sought to be
effected by specific commands which they have not disobeyed. Nor
are they to be held guilty of offenses which the statutes have
omitted, though by inadvertence, to define and condemn.”
Viereck v. United States, 318
U.S. 236, 245 (1943). Our commitment to equal justice and the
rule of law requires the courts to faithfully apply criminal laws
as written, even in periods of national crisis, see,
e.g., Cramer v. United States,
325 U.S.
1, 46–48 (1945), and even when the conduct alleged is
indisputably abhorrent, cf. Michaels v. Davis, 601
U. S. ___, ___ (2024) (Jackson, J., dissenting from denial of
certiorari) (slip op., at 3).

															Notwithstanding the shocking circumstances
involved in this case or the Government’s determination that they
warrant prosecution, today, this Court’s task is to determine what
conduct is proscribed by the criminal statute that has been invoked
as the basis for the obstruction charge at issue here. I join in
the Court’s opinion because I agree with the majority that
§1512(c)(2) does not reach “ ‘all forms of obstructive
conduct’ ” and is, instead, “limited by the preceding list of
criminal violations” in §1512(c)(1). Ante, at 7–8. I write
separately to explain why and how that interpretation of §1512(c)
follows from the legislative purpose that this statute’s text
embodies.

															I

															Our goal in interpreting any statute should be
“to give effect to the intent of Congress.” United States v.
American Trucking Assns., Inc., 310
U.S. 534, 542 (1940). There is no question that intent is
generally expressed through the text of a statute. See American
Tobacco Co. v. Patterson, 456 U.S.
63, 68 (1982). “[H]ewing closely to Congress’s will” as
embodied in the statute that it wrote “is especially important”
when construing laws like this one, which implicate the possible
imposition of punitive sanctions. Pugin v. Garland,
599 U.S. 600, 612 (2023) (Jackson, J., concurring).

															Here, the majority rightly interprets the scope
of §1512(c)(2) by “look[ing] for guidance from” the statutory
“examples [that] come before” it—those listed in §1512(c)(1).
Ante, at 5. In my view, the examples that Congress opts to
include in the text of a statute evince its intentions concerning
what the rule covers and thereby help express a particular
legislative purpose.

															The majority’s football-based example is
illustrative. In a football league, says the majority, “a rule that
players must not ‘grab, twist, or pull a facemask, helmet, or other
equipment with the intent to injure a player, or otherwise attack,
assault, or harm any player,’ ” should not be interpreted as
being directed at hurt feelings, because the listed “prohibited
actions all concern dangerous physical conduct that might inflict
bodily harm; trash talk is simply not of that kind.” Ante,
at 6. I agree. I would add that it is likewise clear from the
listed prohibited acts that such a rule is also not addressing far
more serious and unexpected conduct than the kinds of acts that the
preceding examples describe, which can result in serious and
foreseeable physical injuries during a rough-and-tumble football
game. By contrast, if a player were to shoot or poison another
player, the rule’s drafters would expect the police to be called,
not a referee. Thus, we conclude that the rule is best understood
to be inapposite with respect to conduct at both extremes of the
universe of harmful acts in which a player might conceivably
engage.

															We recognize this intuitive fact—that there is a
certain category of conduct the rule is designed to
prohibit—because we recognize, albeit implicitly, that the drafters
of this rule have included these particular examples for a
reason. We understand that, given the preceding list of
examples, this rule was adopted with a clear intent concerning its
scope. So, though a broad conception of “harm” is “literally
covered by the language” of the rule, ibid., we appreciate
that the rule’s drafters did not intend for that term to take on
its most expansive meaning. Instead, the examples help illuminate
what the drafters actually intended the rule to cover. From the
preceding list, we can confidently discern that the drafters meant
to proscribe only conduct that risks injuries with severity akin to
facemask pulling, not trash talk or murder.[1]

															The upshot is that, when interpreting the scope
of a particular statute or rule, our assessment of the words that
the drafters used informs our understanding of what the rule was
designed to do.[2] Discerning
the rule’s purpose is critical when a court is called upon to
interpret the provision.

															II

															Turning to the statutory provision at issue
here, the purpose of §1512(c), reflected in its text, is clear.
Subsection (c)(1) is indisputably focused on persons who engage in
a particular kind of obstructive conduct: Anyone who “corruptly
. . . alters, destroys, mutilates, or conceals a record,
document, or other object, . . . with the intent to
impair the object’s integrity or availability for use in an
official proceeding.” Subsection (c)(2), in turn, is directed at
criminal conduct that “otherwise” achieves a similar result. I
therefore agree with the majority that §1512(c)(2)’s reach is
narrower than the Government contends. As the majority holds,
§1512(c)(2) “makes it a crime to impair the availability or
integrity of records, documents, or objects used in an official
proceeding in ways other than those specified in (c)(1)” and to
“impai[r] the availability or integrity of other things used
in an official proceeding beyond the ‘record[s], document[s], or
other object[s]’ enumerated in (c)(1).” Ante, at
8–9.

															This understanding of §1512(c)’s text and
purpose is entirely consistent with the statute’s enactment
history. Congress enacted §1512(c) as part of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act, which “was prompted by the exposure of Enron’s massive
accounting fraud and revelations that the company’s outside
auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, had systematically destroyed
potentially incriminating documents.” Yates v. United
States, 574 U.S.
528, 535–536 (2015) (plurality opinion). When introducing what
later became §1512(c) on the Senate floor, Senator Lott emphasized
that its principal purpose was to target document destruction,
which was, at the time, prohibited “only if . . . a
subpoena ha[d] been issued for the evidence that ha[d] been
destroyed or altered.” 148 Cong. Rec. S6545 (July 10, 2002).
“[T]his section,” he explained, “would allow the Government to
charge obstruction against individuals who acted alone, even if the
tampering took place prior to the issuance of a grand jury
subpoena.” Ibid. Similarly, the Senate Report accompanying
the proposed statute noted that “current federal obstruction of
justice statutes relating to document destruction [were] riddled
with loopholes and burdensome proof requirements.” S. Rep.
No. 107–146, p. 6 (2002). According to the Senate Report,
§1512(c) was drafted to fill these gaps: “When a person destroys
evidence with the intent of obstructing any type of investigation
and the matter is within the jurisdiction of a federal agency,
overly technical legal distinctions should neither hinder nor
prevent prosecution and punishment.” Id., at 7.

															Conversely, there is no indication whatsoever
that Congress intended to create a sweeping, all-purpose
obstruction statute. As the majority notes, “[f]ederal obstruction
law consists of numerous provisions that target specific criminal
acts and settings.” Ante, at 10. Outside of the Government’s
proposed interpretation of §1512(c), Congress has never enacted “a
one-size-fits-all solution to obstruction of justice.” Ante,
at 15.[3] Meanwhile, many
States have done just that. See J. Decker, The Varying Parameters
of Obstruction of Justice in American Criminal Law, 65 La.
L. Rev. 49, 77, and n. 236 (2004) (collecting
statutes).[4] The drafters of
the Model Penal Code, too, proposed such a general obstruction
crime. See ALI, Model Penal Code §242.1, p. 201 (1980) (“A
person commits a misdemeanor if he purposely obstructs, impairs or
perverts the administration of law or other governmental function
by force, violence, physical interference or obstacle, breach of
official duty, or any other unlawful act”).

															Given that Congress has never before passed a
similarly broad obstruction law when others have long existed, it
is highly unlikely that Congress intended for subsection (c)(2) to
establish a first-of-its-kind general federal obstruction crime.
Nothing in the enactment history of §1512(c) suggests that Congress
believed that it was creating an all-encompassing statute that
would obviate the need for any other obstruction prohibitions.

															This conclusion is further reinforced by the
fact that, unlike §1512(c)(2), nearly all of the broad, all-purpose
obstruction statutes that various States have enacted are
classified as misdemeanors. See, e.g., Colo. Rev.
Stat. §18–8–102(3) (2023); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 2921.31(B) (Lexis
2024). As a result, these types of obstruction crimes are generally
punishable by up to a year of incarceration. See 1 W. LaFave,
J. Israel, N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal
Procedure §1.8(c), pp. 557–558 (4th ed. 2015). That is so for
a reason: As the Model Penal Code’s drafters explained, “the
existence of a residual misdemeanor offense” allows for the
“appropriately narrow definition of the serious forms of
obstruction carrying felony penalties.” §242.1, Comment 2, at
203. “A broad residual offense . . . provides a hedge
against the ingenuity of offenders,” since “[n]ot all forms of
obstruction can be anticipated and precisely proscribed in specific
offenses.” Ibid. But, at the same time, that kind of broad
criminal statute “must incorporate certain limitations lest it
nullify policy decisions expressed elsewhere.” Ibid. In
other words, these broad misdemeanor obstruction statutes are
“amalgam[s] of generality and constraint.” Ibid.

															The Government’s interpretation of §1512(c)(2),
by contrast, exhibits all the generality of these catchall
misdemeanor obstruction provisions while displaying none of their
restraint. Section 1512(c)(2) is a felony, and it imposes a 20-year
maximum sentence—one of the more severe potential punishments in
Chapter 73 of the U. S. Code. That stands in contrast with
Congress’s specification that other serious obstructive acts
warrant “far shorter terms of imprisonment—for example, three years
for harassment under §1512(d)(1), or ten years for threatening a
juror under §1503.” Ante, at 16.

															Finally, it is worth remembering the statutory
context in which Congress chose to prohibit the obstruction-related
conduct we are considering today. The statute Congress wrote
addresses this matter in a 13-word phrase, enumerated “2,” that is
located within subsection (c) of a much broader §1512, which itself
consists of “a reticulated list of nearly two dozen means of
committing obstruction.” Ante, at 11. However we might
interpret Congress’s drafting choices in other contexts, we should
be wary of finding that a statute addresses significant criminal
conduct when none of the available indicia of congressional intent,
including the prohibition’s placement, suggest that Congress
intended that result. Here, it beggars belief that Congress would
have inserted a breathtakingly broad, first-of-its-kind criminal
obstruction statute (accompanied by a substantial 20-year maximum
penalty) in the midst of a significantly more granular series of
obstruction prohibitions without clarifying its intent to do so—not
in the text of the provision itself, nor in the surrounding
statutory context, nor in any statement issued during the enactment
process.

															*  *  *

															In my view, the Court properly interprets
§1512(c)(2) in the opinion it issues today. It also rightly vacates
the judgment below and remands this case for further proceedings.
Joseph Fischer was charged with violating §1512(c)(2) by corruptly
obstructing “a proceeding before Congress, specifically, Congress’s
certification of the Electoral College vote.” App. 183. That
official proceeding plainly used certain records, documents, or
objects—including, among others, those relating to the electoral
votes themselves. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 65–67. And it might well be
that Fischer’s conduct, as alleged here, involved the impairment
(or the attempted impairment) of the availability or integrity of
things used during the January 6 proceeding “in ways other than
those specified in (c)(1).” Ante, at 8. If so, then
Fischer’s prosecution under §1512(c)(2) can, and should, proceed.
That issue remains available for the lower courts to determine on
remand.

Notes
1
 The majority invokes the
canons of noscitur a sociis and ejusdem generis to
support this inference. See ante, at 5. Those canons are
useful interpretive tools, but in my view, they are ultimately only
devices used in furtherance of achieving our goal of determining
“the intent of Congress.” United States v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 310 U.S.
534, 542 (1940). “There is no invariable rule for the discovery
of that intention.” Ibid. As one treatise explains, such
canons are “not . . . rule[s] of law” but rather “one of
various factors to be considered.” A. Scalia & B. Garner,
Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 212 (2012); see also
id., at 196–198. We apply these canons because we understand
that their principles are consistent with how users of
language—including legislators—convey meaning. See id., at
212 (“Any lawyer or legislative drafter who writes two or more
specifics followed by a general residual term without the intention
that the residual term be limited may be guilty of malpractice”).
As such, they are valid indicia of Congress’s purpose.
2
 Other indicia of the
drafters’ intent, such as the rule’s context or enactment history,
can further inform our understanding of the rule. See infra,
at 5–8.
3
 That is not to say, of
course, that Congress could not enact such a statute if it so
chose. “We have traditionally exercised restraint in assessing the
reach of a federal criminal statute . . . out of
deference to the prerogatives of Congress,” United States v.
Aguilar, 515 U.S.
593, 600 (1995), not because broad criminal proscriptions are
beyond the scope of Congress’s power.
4
 See also,
e.g., Colo. Rev. Stat. §18–8–102(1) (2023) (“A person
commits obstructing government operations if he intentionally
obstructs, impairs, or hinders the performance of a governmental
function by a public servant, by using or threatening to use
violence, force, or physical interference or obstacle”); Ohio Rev.
Code Ann. §2921.31(A) (Lexis 2024) (“No person . . .
shall do any act that hampers or impedes a public official in the
performance of the public official’s lawful duties”).


