::decision_cite:: 23-50
::decision_name::  Chiaverini v. City of Napoleon
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the United States Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme
Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal
errors.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–50

															_________________

															Jascha Chiaverini, et al., PETITIONERS
v. CITY OF NAPOLEON, OHIO, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the sixth circuit

															[June 20, 2024]

															

															Justice Kagan delivered the opinion of the
Court.

															This case involves what is often called a Fourth
Amendment malicious-prosecution claim under 42 U. S. C.
§1983. To succeed on such a claim, a plaintiff must show that a
government official charged him without probable cause, leading to
an unreasonable seizure of his person. See Thompson v.
Clark, 596 U.S. 36, 43, and n. 2 (2022). The question
presented here arises when the official brings multiple charges,
only one of which lacks probable cause. Do the valid charges
insulate the official from a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution
claim relating to the invalid charge? The answer is no: The valid
charges do not create a categorical bar. We leave for another day
the follow-on question of how to determine in those circumstances
whether the baseless charge caused the requisite seizure.

															I

															This dispute began with a set of peculiar
interactions between a jewelry store owner and police officers in
Napoleon, Ohio. See generally App. to Pet. for Cert. 2a–7a. The
jeweler, Jascha Chiaverini, bought a ring for $45 from a (petty)
jewel thief. The ring’s rightful owners found out about the sale,
and asked Chiaverini to return their property. Chiaverini said no,
so the owners contacted the police. Two officers, on a later visit
to the store, directed Chiaverini to surrender the ring to its
owners. But Chiaverini refused their request too, saying that it
contradicted a letter he had just received from the police
department telling him to retain the ring as evidence. And when
repeating his refusal to another officer the next day, Chiaverini
suggested (for reasons unclear) that he was operating his store
without a license. The result of that (shall we say, unprofitable)
exchange was that the police turned their attention from the
original theft to Chiaverini’s business.

															Soon afterward, the officers launched a criminal
proceeding against Chiaverini in municipal court. They filed three
complaints, each charging him with a separate offense. Two were
misdemeanors: receiving stolen property and dealing in precious
metals without a license. The third was a felony: money laundering.
To support their accompanying application for an arrest warrant,
the officers submitted an affidavit making the case for probable
cause on all three charges, but focusing on the felony. See App.
16–17. For that charge to succeed, Chiaverini must have known when
he bought the ring that the transaction involved the proceeds of
unlawful activity. See Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §1315.55(a)(1) (Lexis
2016). In support of that element, the officers averred that
Chiaverini always suspected the ring was stolen. The judge issued
the requested warrant, and the officers arrested Chiaverini. He
remained in custody for three days, until his arraignment. At a
later preliminary hearing, the judge heard testimony about the
evidence supporting the officers’ probable-cause allegations. See
App. to Pet. for Cert. 6a–7a. The officers maintained that
Chiaverini had admitted in their interview to suspecting the ring
was stolen; Chiaverini denied making any such statement. At the
hearing’s conclusion, the judge again found probable cause, and set
the three charges for trial.

															The county prosecutors, though, decided that
they had higher priorities. They failed to present the case to a
grand jury in the required time. The court therefore dismissed the
charges.

															But Chiaverini decided not to let matters lie.
After all, he had been arrested and held for three days, he thought
unjustifiably. So he sued the officers under §1983, alleging what
is known as a Fourth Amendment claim for malicious prosecution. To
prevail on that claim, he had to show (among other things) that the
officers brought criminal charges against him without probable
cause. See Thompson, 596 U. S., at 43–44. In addressing
that issue, he gave special attention to the felony charge for
money laundering. According to Chiaverini, the officers lacked
probable cause for that charge for two reasons. First, they had no
reason to think he knew the ring was stolen; indeed, he said, their
claim that he had admitted as much was an out-and-out lie. And
second, they could not show—as, in his view, Ohio law required—that
the ring was worth more than $1,000; its value was far less, more
in line with its $45 purchase price. So Chiaverini concluded that
his suit satisfied the “without probable cause” element of a Fourth
Amendment malicious-prosecution claim.

															After the District Court granted summary
judgment to the officers, the Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit affirmed. It did so without addressing either of
Chiaverini’s arguments about the felony charge’s basis. In the
Sixth Circuit’s view, there was clearly probable cause to support
the two misdemeanor charges the officers had filed. See App. to
Pet. for Cert. 11a–16a. And because that was true, the court
thought, the validity of the felony charge did not matter. “So long
as probable cause supports at least one charge against Chiaverini
(like his receipt-of-stolen-property violation),” then his
malicious-prosecution claim “based on other charges (like his
money-laundering charge) also fail[s].” Id., at 10a. Or said
another way, a single valid charge in a proceeding would insulate
officers from a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim
relating to any other charges, no matter how baseless.

															In taking that position, the Sixth Circuit
stepped out on its own. Three other Courts of Appeals have held
that the presence of probable cause for one charge does not
automatically defeat a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim
alleging the absence of probable cause for another charge. See
Williams v. Aguirre, 965 F.3d 1147, 1159–1162 (CA11
2020); Johnson v. Knorr, 477 F.3d 75, 83–85 (CA3
2007); Posr v. Doherty, 944 F.2d 91, 100 (CA2
1991).

															We granted certiorari to resolve that circuit
split, 601 U. S. ___ (2023), and we now vacate the decision
below.

															II

															Section 1983 enables an individual to recover
damages from a state or local official for the deprivation of a
constitutional right. Such a suit is of course premised on a
constitutional violation. But its elements and rules may also be
shaped by common-law tort principles, against whose backdrop §1983
was enacted. See Manuel v. Joliet, 580 U.S. 357, 370
(2017). To determine the precise contours of a constitutional claim
under §1983, we have held, a court should identify the “most
analogous” common-law tort to the constitutional harm alleged.
Ibid. And the court should incorporate that tort’s
requirements to the extent consistent with “the values and purposes
of the constitutional right at issue.” Ibid.;
Thompson, 596 U. S., at 43.

															The claim Chiaverini brought—a Fourth Amendment
malicious-prosecution claim—emerged from that method. The
constitutional violation alleged in such a suit is a type of
unreasonable seizure—an arrest and detention of a person based on a
criminal charge lacking probable cause. In Thompson v.
Clark, we analogized a suit alleging that Fourth Amendment
wrong to the common-law tort of malicious prosecution. See
id., at 43–44. The “gravamen” of both, we reasoned, is “the
wrongful initiation of charges without probable cause” (though in
the Fourth Amendment context, those charges must cause a seizure as
well). Id., at 43, and n. 2. Because of that
similarity, the malicious-prosecution tort can inform a court’s
understanding of the kind of claim Chiaverini has brought.

															The question here is whether a Fourth Amendment
malicious-prosecution claim may succeed when a baseless charge is
accompanied by a valid charge. The Court of Appeals, as described
above, answered that question with a categorical no: Even if the
felony count lacked probable cause, the Sixth Circuit held,
Chiaverini could not recover because the misdemeanor counts were
adequately supported. See supra, at 3–4. But a funny thing
happened on the way to this Court. The officers now agree with
Chiaverini that there is no such flat bar. See Brief for Officers
24–27; Brief for Chiaverini 2–3. And the United States as amicus
curiae also argues that the Sixth Circuit rule is wrong. See
Brief for United States 10. We agree with them all. Consistent with
both the Fourth Amendment and traditional common-law practice,
courts should evaluate suits like Chiaverini’s charge by
charge.

															Consider first how that result follows from
established Fourth Amendment law. Under that Amendment, a pretrial
detention (like the one Chiaverini suffered) must be based on
probable cause. See Manuel, 580 U. S., at 364–369 .
Otherwise, such a detention counts as an unreasonable seizure. And
even when a detention is justified at the outset, it may become
unreasonably prolonged if the reason for it lapses. See
Rodriguez v. United States, 575
U.S. 348, 354–357 (2015). So if an invalid charge—say, one
fabricated by police officers—causes a detention either to start or
to continue, then the Fourth Amendment is violated. And that is so
even when a valid charge has also been brought (although, as soon
noted, that charge may well complicate the causation issue, see
infra, at 7). Take the starkest possible example. A person
is detained on two charges—a drug offense supported by probable
cause and a gun offense built on lies. The prosecutor, for whatever
reason, drops the (valid) drug charge, leaving the person in jail
on the (invalid) gun charge alone. The inclusion of the baseless
charge—though brought along with a good charge—has thus caused a
constitutional violation, by unreasonably extending the pretrial
detention. Even the Napoleon officers agree, offering a similar
example. See Brief for Officers 25; see also Brief for United
States 17–18. So the bringing of one valid charge in a criminal
proceeding should not categorically preclude a claim based on the
Fourth Amendment.

															And the same conclusion follows from the
common-law principles governing malicious-prosecution suits when
§1983 was enacted. As noted above, a plaintiff in such a suit had
to show that an official initiated a charge without probable cause.
See Thompson, 596 U. S., at 44; supra, at 4–5.
He did not have to show, however, that every charge brought
against him lacked an adequate basis. Rather, courts in that era
assessed probable cause charge by charge. “[I]f groundless charges”
are “coupled with others which are well founded,” explained one
State Supreme Court, the groundless ones could still “constitute a
valid cause of action.” Boogher v. Bryant, 86 Mo. 42,
49 (1885). Another agreed: It was no “defen[s]e that there was
probable cause for part of the prosecution.” Barron v.
Mason, 31 Vt. 189, 198 (1858). Or as a leading treatise from
the era summarized the rule: “It is not necessary that the whole
proceedings be utterly groundless.” 2 S. Greenleaf, Law of Evidence
400 (10th ed. 1868); see 1 F. Hilliard, Law of Torts or Private
Wrongs §1, p. 435, n. (b) (4th ed. 1874). One bad charge,
even if joined with good ones, was enough to satisfy the
malicious-prosecution tort’s “without probable cause” element.

															All that dooms the Sixth Circuit’s categorical
rule barring a Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim if any
charge is valid. That rule receives support from neither half of
the claim’s name—neither from the Fourth Amendment nor from the
malicious-prosecution tort we have invoked as an analogy. And the
question is not close, as shown by the parties’ decision not to
contest it in this Court.

															The parties, almost needless to say, have found
a substitute ground of disagreement, involving the element of
causation. As noted earlier, a Fourth Amendment
malicious-prosecution suit depends not just on an unsupported
charge, but on that charge’s causing a seizure—like the arrest and
three-day detention here. See supra, at 4–5. The parties and
amicus curiae offer three different views of how that
causation element is met when a valid charge is also in the
picture. Chiaverini’s test is the easiest to satisfy. On his view,
when both valid and invalid charges are brought before a judge for
a probable cause determination, the warrant the judge issues is
irretrievably tainted; so any detention depending on that warrant
is the result of the invalid charge. See Reply Brief 10–11 (citing
Williams, 965 F. 3d, at 1165); Tr. of Oral Arg. 5–6,
26–28. The United States disagrees, arguing for the use of a
but-for test to discover whether the invalid charge, apart from the
valid ones, caused a detention. See id., at 41–43. The
question then would be whether the judge “in fact [would] have
authorized” the detention had the invalid charge not been present.
Id., at 43. And finally, the officers urge a still stricter
test. In their view, the question is whether the judge, absent the
invalid charge, could have legally authorized the
detention—regardless of what he really would have done. See
Brief for Officers 20–21.

															But that new dispute is not now fit for our
resolution. The test for finding causation is no part of the
question we agreed to review. For that reason, it was not fully
briefed. And most important, the court below did not address the
matter, nor have many others. “[W]e are a court of review, not of
first view.” Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S.
709, 718, n. 7 (2005). So we leave the causation question in
the hands of the Sixth Circuit, as it further considers
Chiaverini’s Fourth Amendment malicious-prosecution claim.

															We accordingly vacate the judgment of the Court
of Appeals and remand the case for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.

															

															It is so ordered.

													
