::decision_cite:: 23-719
::decision_name::  Trump v. Anderson
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Sotomayor
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–719

															_________________

															DONALD J. TRUMP, PETITIONER v. NORMA
ANDERSON, et al.

															on writ of certiorari to the supreme court of
colorado

															[March 4, 2024]

															

															Justice Sotomayor, Justice Kagan, and Justice
Jackson, concurring in the judgment.

															“If it is not necessary to decide more to
dispose of a case, then it is necessary not to decide more.”
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, 597
U.S. 215, 348 (2022) (Roberts, C. J., concurring in judgment).
That fundamental principle of judicial restraint is practically as
old as our Republic. This Court is authorized “to say what the law
is” only because “[t]hose who apply [a] rule to particular cases
. . . must of necessity expound and interpret that
rule.” Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177 (1803)
(emphasis added).

															Today, the Court departs from that vital
principle, deciding not just this case, but challenges that might
arise in the future. In this case, the Court must decide whether
Colorado may keep a Presidential candidate off the ballot on the
ground that he is an oathbreaking insurrectionist and thus
disqualified from holding federal office under Section 3 of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Allowing Colorado to do so would, we agree,
create a chaotic state-by-state patchwork, at odds with our
Nation’s federalism principles. That is enough to resolve this
case. Yet the majority goes further. Even though “[a]ll nine
Members of the Court” agree that this independent and sufficient
rationale resolves this case, five Justices go on. They decide
novel constitutional questions to insulate this Court and
petitioner from future controversy. Ante, at 13. Although
only an individual State’s action is at issue here, the majority
opines on which federal actors can enforce Section 3, and how they
must do so. The majority announces that a disqualification for
insurrection can occur only when Congress enacts a particular kind
of legislation pursuant to Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In doing so, the majority shuts the door on other potential means
of federal enforcement. We cannot join an opinion that decides
momentous and difficult issues unnecessarily, and we therefore
concur only in the judgment.

															I

															Our Constitution leaves some questions to the
States while committing others to the Federal Government.
Federalism principles embedded in that constitutional structure
decide this case. States cannot use their control over the ballot
to “undermine the National Government.” U. S. Term Limits,
Inc. v. Thornton, 514 U.S.
779, 810 (1995). That danger is even greater “in the context of
a Presidential election.” Anderson v. Celebrezze,
460 U.S.
780, 794–795 (1983). State restrictions in that context
“implicate a uniquely important national interest” extending beyond
a State’s “own borders.” Ibid. No doubt, States have
significant “authority over presidential electors” and, in turn,
Presidential elections. Chiafalo v. Washington, 591
U.S. 578, 588 (2020). That power, however, is limited by “other
constitutional constraint[s],” including federalism principles.
Id., at 589.

															The majority rests on such principles when it
explains why Colorado cannot take Petitioner off the ballot.
“[S]tate-by-state resolution of the question whether Section 3 bars
a particular candidate for President from serving,” the majority
explains, “would be quite unlikely to yield a uniform answer
consistent with the basic principle that ‘the President
. . . represent[s] all the voters in the
Nation.’ ” Ante, at 11 (quoting Anderson, 460
U. S., at 795). That is especially so, the majority adds,
because different States can reach “[c]onflicting . . .
outcomes concerning the same candidate . . . not just
from differing views of the merits, but from variations in state
law governing the proceedings” to enforce Section 3. Ante,
at 11.

															The contrary conclusion that a handful of
officials in a few States could decide the Nation’s next President
would be especially surprising with respect to Section 3. The
Reconstruction Amendments “were specifically designed as an
expansion of federal power and an intrusion on state sovereignty.”
City of Rome v. United States, 446 U.S.
156, 179 (1980). Section 3 marked the first time the
Constitution placed substantive limits on a State’s authority to
choose its own officials. Given that context, it would defy logic
for Section 3 to give States new powers to determine who may hold
the Presidency. Cf. ante, at 8 (“It would be incongruous to
read this particular Amendment as granting the States the
power—silently no less—to disqualify a candidate for federal
office”).

															That provides a secure and sufficient basis to
resolve this case. To allow Colorado to take a presidential
candidate off the ballot under Section 3 would imperil the Framers’
vision of “a Federal Government directly responsible to the
people.” U. S. Term Limits, 514 U. S., at 821. The
Court should have started and ended its opinion with this
conclusion.

															II

															Yet the Court continues on to resolve
questions not before us. In a case involving no federal action
whatsoever, the Court opines on how federal enforcement of Section
3 must proceed. Congress, the majority says, must enact legislation
under Section 5 prescribing the procedures to
“ ‘ “ascertain[ ] what particular
individuals” ’ ” should be disqualified. Ante, at
5 (quoting Griffin’s Case, 11 F. Cas. 7, 26 (No. 5,815) (CC
Va. 1869) (Chase, Circuit Justice)). These musings are as
inadequately supported as they are gratuitous.

															To start, nothing in Section 3’s text supports
the majority’s view of how federal disqualification efforts must
operate. Section 3 states simply that “[n]o person shall” hold
certain positions and offices if they are oathbreaking
insurrectionists. Amdt. 14. Nothing in that unequivocal bar
suggests that implementing legislation enacted under Section 5 is
“critical” (or, for that matter, what that word means in this
context). Ante, at 5. In fact, the text cuts the opposite
way. Section 3 provides that when an oathbreaking insurrectionist
is disqualified, “Congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each
House, remove such disability.” It is hard to understand why the
Constitution would require a congressional supermajority to remove
a disqualification if a simple majority could nullify Section 3’s
operation by repealing or declining to pass implementing
legislation. Even petitioner’s lawyer acknowledged the “tension” in
Section 3 that the majority’s view creates. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
31.

															Similarly, nothing else in the rest of the
Fourteenth Amendment supports the majority’s view. Section 5 gives
Congress the “power to enforce [the Amendment] by appropriate
legislation.” Remedial legislation of any kind, however, is not
required. All the Reconstruction Amendments (including the due
process and equal protection guarantees and prohibition of slavery)
“are self-executing,” meaning that they do not depend on
legislation. City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S.
507, 524 (1997); see Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S.
3, 20 (1883). Similarly, other constitutional rules of
disqualification, like the two-term limit on the Presidency, do not
require implementing legislation. See, e.g., Art. II,
§1, cl. 5 (Presidential Qualifications); Amdt. 22
(Presidential Term Limits). Nor does the majority suggest
otherwise. It simply creates a special rule for the insurrection
disability in Section 3.

															The majority is left with next to no support for
its requirement that a Section 3 disqualification can occur only
pursuant to legislation enacted for that purpose. It cites
Griffin’s Case, but that is a nonprecedential, lower court
opinion by a single Justice in his capacity as a circuit judge. See
ante, at 5 (quoting 11 F. Cas., at 26). Once again,
even petitioner’s lawyer distanced himself from fully embracing
this case as probative of Section 3’s meaning. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
35–36. The majority also cites Senator Trumbull’s statements that
Section 3 “ ‘provide[d] no means for enforcing’ ” itself.
Ante, at 5 (quoting Cong. Globe, 41st Cong., 1st Sess., 626
(1869)). The majority, however, neglects to mention the Senator’s
view that “[i]t is the [F]ourteenth [A]mendment that prevents a
person from holding office,” with the proposed legislation simply
“affor[ding] a more efficient and speedy remedy” for effecting the
disqualification. Cong. Globe, 41st Cong., 1st Sess., at
626–627.

															Ultimately, under the guise of providing a more
“complete explanation for the judgment,” ante, at 13, the
majority resolves many unsettled questions about Section 3. It
forecloses judicial enforcement of that provision, such as might
occur when a party is prosecuted by an insurrectionist and raises a
defense on that score. The majority further holds that any
legislation to enforce this provision must prescribe certain
procedures “ ‘tailor[ed]’ ” to Section 3, ante, at
10, ruling out enforcement under general federal statutes requiring
the government to comply with the law. By resolving these and other
questions, the majority attempts to insulate all alleged
insurrectionists from future challenges to their holding federal
office.

															*  *  *

															“What it does today, the Court should have
left undone.” Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S.
98, 158 (2000) (Breyer, J., dissenting). The Court today needed
to resolve only a single question: whether an individual State may
keep a Presidential candidate found to have engaged in insurrection
off its ballot. The majority resolves much more than the case
before us. Although federal enforcement of Section 3 is in no way
at issue, the majority announces novel rules for how that
enforcement must operate. It reaches out to decide Section 3
questions not before us, and to foreclose future efforts to
disqualify a Presidential candidate under that provision. In a
sensitive case crying out for judicial restraint, it abandons that
course.

															Section 3 serves an important, though rarely
needed, role in our democracy. The American people have the power
to vote for and elect candidates for national office, and that is a
great and glorious thing. The men who drafted and ratified the
Fourteenth Amendment, however, had witnessed an “insurrection [and]
rebellion” to defend slavery. §3. They wanted to ensure that those
who had participated in that insurrection, and in possible future
insurrections, could not return to prominent roles. Today, the
majority goes beyond the necessities of this case to limit how
Section 3 can bar an oathbreaking insurrectionist from becoming
President. Although we agree that Colorado cannot enforce Section
3, we protest the majority’s effort to use this case to define the
limits of federal enforcement of that provision. Because we would
decide only the issue before us, we concur only in the
judgment.

													
