::decision_cite:: 23-726
::decision_name::  Moyle v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Opinion
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 23–726 and 23–727

															_________________

															Mike Moyle, Speaker of the Idaho House
of Representatives, et al., PETITIONERS

															23–726v.

															United States

															

															Idaho, PETITIONER

															23–727v.

															UNITED STATES

															on writs of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 26, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, concurring in part and
dissenting in part.

															In 1986, Congress passed the Emergency Medical
Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), which requires hospitals to
provide stabilizing treatment when patients present with emergency
medical conditions. See 42 U. S. C. §1395dd. Sometimes,
an abortion is the only way to stabilize a patient and, therefore,
comply with EMTALA. But Idaho law prohibits abortions unless the
treating physician believes that the abortion is “necessary to
prevent the [patient’s] death.” Idaho Code Ann. §18–622(2)(a)(i)
(Supp. 2023).

															Recognizing the clear conflict between EMTALA
and Idaho law, a Federal District Judge issued an injunction that
had the effect of ensuring that Idaho physicians would be able to
provide the abortion care EMTALA requires. Five months ago, this
Court stayed that injunction. As a legal matter, this Court’s stay
meant that unless a doctor could actually say that the abortion was
necessary to prevent a patient’s death, that doctor could no longer
provide abortion care that she viewed as reasonably necessary to
keep a patient from losing her uterus, going into organ failure, or
avoiding any number of other serious health risks. Compare
§18–622(a)(i) with 42 U. S. C. §1395dd(e)(1)(A). As a
practical matter, this Court’s intervention meant that Idaho
physicians were forced to step back and watch as their patients
suffered, or arrange for their patients to be airlifted out of
Idaho.

															This months-long catastrophe was completely
unnecessary. More to the point, it directly violated federal law,
which in our system of government is supreme. See Art. VI,
cl. 2. As Justice Kagan explains, EMTALA plainly requires
doctors to provide medically necessary stabilizing abortions in
limited situations. See ante, at 4–6 (concurring opinion).
To the extent that Idaho law conflicts with EMTALA, the State’s law
must give way. I join in Justice Kagan’s statutory analysis, see
ibid., and I concur in the Court’s per curiam
decision to lift its stay, which should not have been entered in
the first place. I dissent in part because, in my view, the Court
is wrong to dismiss these cases as improvidently granted.

															I

															This Court typically dismisses cases as
improvidently granted based on “circumstances . . . which
‘were not . . . fully apprehended at the time certiorari
was granted.’ ” The Monrosa v. Carbon Black Export,
Inc., 359 U.S.
180, 183 (1959) (some alterations in original). This procedural
mechanism should be reserved for that end—not turned into a tool
for the Court to use to avoid issues that it does not wish to
decide.

															The reasons that justified our grant of
certiorari in these cases still hold true today. See this Court’s
Rule 11. The importance of recognizing Congress’s judgments in
EMTALA remains as imperative as ever. The United States is still
hamstrung in its ability to enforce federal law while States pass
laws that effectively nullify EMTALA’s requirements. And, on the
ground, healthcare providers “have been all but paralyzed by legal
uncertainties,” placing pregnant patients at risk while they are
waiting to be transferred out of State to receive the care they
need. Brief for St. Luke’s Health System as Amicus Curiae
14–15.

															If anything, the need for a clear answer to the
Supremacy Clause question has only increased in the intervening
months. Other States across the country have enacted legislation
that gives rise to the same sort of legal conflict that Idaho has
created. This pre-emption issue is not going away anytime soon and
will most certainly return to this Court. Indeed, it already has.
Just three days before we granted this petition, the Fifth Circuit
decided a similar case, affirming a permanent injunction that
prevents the United States from enforcing EMTALA’s requirements
with respect to stabilizing emergency abortions prohibited by Texas
law. See Texas v. Becerra, 89 F. 4th 529, 533
(2024). The United States has already petitioned for certiorari in
that case. See Pet. for Cert. in Becerra v. Texas,
O. T. 2023, No. 23–1076.

															Nor has there been any change in today’s cases
that might eliminate or undermine the need for this Court’s review.
The Government continues to maintain (correctly, in my view) that
EMTALA’s plain text requires hospitals to provide certain emergency
abortions when doing so is the only way to stabilize an emergency
condition. Brief for United States 12–20. Idaho continues to
criminalize the provision of such abortions unless doing so is
necessary to prevent the patient’s death. Idaho Code Ann.
§18–622(2)(a)(i). And both Idaho and the United States still agree
that Idaho law directly criminalizes emergency care that the
Federal Government reads EMTALA to require. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
16–17, 65–66. Idaho’s lawyers may have changed their tune about the
exact types of medical care that fall in the gap between state and
federal law, but the fundamentals of this dispute remain the
same.

															II

															Most importantly, as Justice Kagan observes,
the conflict between the state and federal law—as they are actually
being interpreted and applied on the ground—is both substantial and
significant. Ante, at 4–6. It is a clash that clearly exists
despite the attempt by Idaho’s counsel to muddy the waters
concerning the scope of the State’s law.

															The textual conflict is plain. EMTALA requires
stabilizing treatment if a patient has an acute medical condition
that is so severe “that the absence of immediate medical attention
could be reasonably expected to” either result in a serious health
risk, or seriously threaten bodily functions or organs. 42
U. S. C. §§1395dd(b)(1), (e)(1)(A). In such cases, EMTALA
requires hospitals “to provide such medical treatment of the
condition as may be necessary to assure, within reasonable medical
probability, that no material deterioration of the condition is
likely to . . . occur.” §1395dd(e)(3)(A). Idaho’s broad
criminalization of abortion—unless the treating physician believes
that the abortion is “necessary to prevent the [patient’s] death,”
Idaho Code Ann. §18–622(2)(a)(i)—conflicts with the text of EMTALA.
Put simply, under federal law, a hospital must provide an
emergency abortion that is reasonably necessary to preserve a
patient’s health within the meaning of EMTALA. But, under Idaho
law, a doctor cannot provide this care (required by federal law)
without committing a criminal act.

															From the beginning of this litigation, the
United States has emphasized the host of emergency medical
conditions that require stabilizing abortions—even when the
procedure is not necessarily life saving. That list includes
pre-eclampsia, preterm premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM),
sepsis, and placental abruption, to name just a few examples.
Having now been sued over its interference with EMTALA’s
protections for people experiencing these conditions, Idaho has
shifted its position, both here and before the District Court,
recharacterizing abortions in these scenarios as life-saving care
permitted under Idaho law.

															Some of my colleagues appear to view this
convenient rhetorical maneuver as a material change that (also
conveniently) reduces the conflict between state and federal law to
the point that a ruling from this Court is no longer warranted. See
ante, at 6–7 (Barrett, J., concurring). But it is both
legally and factually implausible to say that Idaho’s current
litigating position actually mitigates the conflict between that
State’s law and EMTALA.

															The conflict between state and federal law still
exists—in real life. Idaho cannot credibly maintain that its law
always permits abortions in cases of PPROM or pre-eclampsia
such that its mandate never conflicts with federal law. The
same medical condition can present with different risks in
different patients. See, e.g., Brief for Physicians
for Reproductive Health as Amicus Curiae 10–11; Brief for
Physicians for Human Rights as Amicus Curiae 11–19. And,
often, a doctor simply does not know what the risks are or whether
a patient might face death. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 103–104; 2 App.
615–617. Such a doctor, observing the different legal thresholds
for action under state and federal law—not to mention the severe
criminal penalties for a miscalculation—would surely be cowed into
not providing abortion care that medical standards warrant and
federal law requires. Do not take my word for this; it is
already happening.[1]* So
it is strange, to say the least, that this Court would shirk its
duty to resolve a pressing legal issue on the basis of
representations that defy medical realities.

															In any event, the representations Idaho’s
counsel made during oral argument and in the State’s briefs filed
in this Court are not a definitive interpretation of Idaho law.
That authority remains with the Idaho Supreme Court, which has
never endorsed the State’s position. To the contrary, the Idaho
Supreme Court has emphasized that, to avoid criminal liability, a
doctor must subjectively believe that an abortion is necessary to
prevent death. Planned Parenthood Great Northwest v.
State, 171 Idaho 374, 445–446, 522 P.3d 1132, 1203–1204
(2023). And that is to say nothing of local prosecutors, who may
not be aware of (or care about) Idaho’s newfound interpretation of
its abortion ban, and who are highly incentivized to enforce the
law to the hilt. See Idaho Code Ann. §63–3642 (Supp. 2023)
(withholding funding from local governments if their officials
decline to enforce Idaho felony laws, which include these felony
abortion laws); see also Brief for Idaho Coalition for Safe
Healthcare, Inc., as Amicus Curiae 14–24 (discussing myriad
ways in which state and local officials in Idaho have targeted
physicians). Still, some of my colleagues latch onto the bald
representations of Idaho’s counsel, using them as an escape hatch
that justifies our dispensing with having to issue a merits ruling
in these cases.

															We cannot simply wind back the clock to how
things were before the Court injected itself into this matter. Our
intervention has already distorted this litigation process. We
permitted Idaho’s law to go into effect by staying the District
Court’s injunction in the first place, then allowed this matter to
sit on our merits docket for five months while we considered the
question presented. It is too little, too late for the Court to
take a mulligan and just tell the lower courts to carry on as if
none of this has happened. As the old adage goes: The Court has
made this bed so now it must lie in it—by proceeding to decide the
merits of the critical pre-emption issue this case presents.

															We have granted certiorari and heard argument.
We have had ample opportunity to consider the issues. The parties
were well represented on both sides, and dozens of amici
have weighed in. What is more, the necessary legal reasoning is
straightforward, and the answer to the question presented is—or at
least should be—quite clear: Idaho law prohibits what federal law
requires, so to that extent, under the Supremacy Clause, Idaho’s
law is pre-empted. See Mutual Pharmaceutical Co. v.
Bartlett, 570 U.S.
472, 479–480 (2013) (“[I]t has long been settled that state
laws that conflict with federal laws are ‘without effect’ ”
(quoting Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U.S.
725, 746 (1981))). There is simply no good reason not to
resolve this conflict now.

															*  *  *

															Despite the clarity of the legal issue and the
dire need for an answer from this Court, today six Justices refuse
to recognize the rights that EMTALA protects. See ante, at
4–7 (Barrett, J., concurring); post, at 4–11
(Alito, J., dissenting). The majority opts, instead, to
dismiss these cases. But storm clouds loom ahead. Three Justices
suggest, at least in this context, that States have free rein to
nullify federal law. See post, at 11–14 (Alito, J.,
dissenting). And three more decline to disagree with those
dissenters on the merits. See ante, at 4–7
(Barrett, J., concurring). The latter group offers only
murmurs that “petitioners have raised a difficult and consequential
argument” about Congress’s authority under the Spending Clause.
Ante, at 6 (Barrett, J., concurring). So, as of today,
the Court has not adopted Idaho’s farfetched theories—but it has
not rejected them either.

															Instead, the Court puts off the decision. But
how long must pregnant patients wait for an answer? Until we
confront the pending petition that the Government filed with us
after the Fifth Circuit enabled Texas’s flouting of EMTALA? Until
these very cases return to us in a few years? Will this Court just
have a do-over, rehearing and rehashing the same arguments we are
considering now, just at a comparatively more convenient point in
time? Or maybe we will keep punting on this issue altogether,
allowing chaos to reign wherever lower courts enable States to
flagrantly undercut federal law, facilitating the suffering of
people in need of urgent medical treatment.

															After today, there will be a few months—maybe a
few years—during which doctors may no longer need to airlift
pregnant patients out of Idaho. As Justice Kagan emphasizes,
portions of Idaho’s law will be preliminarily enjoined (at least
for now). Ante, at 2, 4. But having not heard from this
Court on the ultimate pre-emption issue, Idaho’s doctors will still
have to decide whether to provide emergency medical care in the
midst of highly charged legal circumstances with no guarantee that
this fragile detente over the State’s categorical prohibitions will
be maintained. Cf. ante, at 8 (Barrett, J., concurring)
(“Even with the preliminary injunction in place, Idaho’s ability to
enforce its law remains almost entirely intact”).

															So, to be clear: Today’s decision is not a
victory for pregnant patients in Idaho. It is delay. While this
Court dawdles and the country waits, pregnant people experiencing
emergency medical conditions remain in a precarious position, as
their doctors are kept in the dark about what the law requires.
This Court had a chance to bring clarity and certainty to this
tragic situation, and we have squandered it. And for as long as we
refuse to declare what the law requires, pregnant patients in
Idaho, Texas, and elsewhere will be paying the price. Because we
owe them—and the Nation—an answer to the straightforward
pre-emption question presented in these cases, I respectfully
dissent.

Notes
1
*See Brief for Idaho Coalition
for Safe Healthcare, Inc., as Amicus Curiae 7–13 (providing
examples in Idaho where doctors’ lack of certainty prevented them
from providing medically necessary abortions); see also Brief for
St. Luke’s Health System as Amicus Curiae 14–16 (same);
Brief for Amanda Zurawski et al. as Amici Curiae 29–30
(same); Brief for Physicians for Human Rights as Amicus
Curiae 12–17 (same).


