::decision_cite:: 23-726
::decision_name::  Moyle v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 23–726 and 23–727

															_________________

															Mike Moyle, Speaker of the Idaho House
of Representatives, et al., PETITIONERS

															23–726v.

															United States

															

															Idaho, PETITIONER

															23–727v.

															UNITED STATES

															on writs of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 26, 2024]

															Justice Barrett, with whom The Chief Justice
and Justice Kavanaugh join, concurring.

															We granted certiorari before judgment in these
cases to decide whether the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor
Act (EMTALA) preempts a provision of Idaho law that prohibits
abortions except when necessary to save the life of the mother. 601
U. S. ___ (2024). Because the shape of these cases has
substantially shifted since we granted certiorari, I concur in the
Court’s judgment dismissing the writ as improvidently granted.

															I

															In 2022, the Department of Health and Human
Services issued guidance to “remind hospitals of their existing
obligation to comply with EMTALA.” Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services, Reinforcement of EMTALA Obligations Specific to
Patients Who Are Pregnant or Are Experiencing Pregnancy Loss, Note,
p. 1 (July 11, 2022) (rev. Aug. 25, 2022) (italics deleted).
The guidance tells physicians that if they believe that “abortion
is the stabilizing treatment necessary to resolve” a pregnant
woman’s emergency medical condition, they “must provide that
treatment.” Id., at 1 (italics and emphasis deleted). Any
contrary state law, the guidance continues, is “preempted.”
Ibid. (italics and emphasis deleted).

															Idaho’s Defense of Life Act criminalizes the
performance of most abortions. Idaho Code Ann. §18–622 (Supp.
2023). As originally enacted, the Act allowed accused physicians to
raise an affirmative defense that “the abortion was necessary to
prevent the death of the pregnant woman.” §18–622(2)(a)(i). Soon
before the Act was set to take effect, the United States sued
Idaho, seeking to enjoin Idaho’s law “to the extent it conflicts
with EMTALA.” 1 App. 5. EMTALA, the United States argued, requires
physicians to perform abortions under certain circumstances that
Idaho’s Act would forbid.

															After holding an evidentiary hearing, the
District Court identified a conflict and granted a preliminary
injunction. 623 F. Supp. 3d 1096 (Idaho 2022). The court based
its conclusion on three key assumptions: (1) The Act prohibits the
termination of ectopic pregnancies; (2) the pregnant woman’s death
must be objectively “imminent” or “certain” before a physician can
perform an abortion; and (3) the “necessary to prevent death”
exception is only an affirmative defense. Id., at 1109–1114.
The Government’s witnesses, whose testimony the court credited,
made similar assumptions. Id., at 1104–1105. They claimed
that the Act might prohibit abortions as treatment for conditions
including severe heart failure, pre-eclampsia, preterm premature
rupture of the membranes (PPROM), sepsis, and placental abruption,
because a physician could not know, “with certainty,” that an
abortion is necessary to save the mother’s life in those
circumstances. See, e.g., 1 App. 30–38. They also
assumed that the Act only permitted abortions where death was
“imminent.” See, e.g., 2 id., at 608.

															After the District Court ruled, the Idaho
Supreme Court construed the Act. That court explained that the Act
“does not require objective certainty, or a particular level
of immediacy, before the abortion can be ‘necessary’ to save the
woman’s life.” Planned Parenthood Great Nw. v. State,
171 Idaho 374, 445, 522 P.3d 1132, 1203 (2023). And “treating an
ectopic pregnancy, by removing the fetus,” the court concluded,
does not count as an “ ‘abortion’ ” under the Act.
Ibid.

															Without holding a new evidentiary hearing, the
District Court denied Idaho’s motion for reconsideration. 2023 WL
3284977 (May 4, 2023). The Idaho Legislature later amended the
definition of “abortion” to exclude “[t]he removal of a dead unborn
child” and “[t]he removal of an ectopic or molar pregnancy.”
§18–604(1)(b), (c). It also changed the “life of the mother”
affirmative defense into an exception from the prohibition on
criminal abortions. §18–622(2).

															The Ninth Circuit initially stayed the District
Court’s injunction, 83 F. 4th 1130 (2023), but the en banc court
vacated the panel’s stay, declined to stay the injunction, and
scheduled oral argument on the merits, 82 F. 4th 1296 (2023). We
granted Idaho’s and the Legislature’s applications to stay the
District Court’s injunction pending appeal, treated the
applications as petitions for a writ of certiorari before judgment,
and granted the petitions. 601 U. S. ___ (2024).

															II

															Before the Ninth Circuit had the opportunity
to review the District Court’s preliminary injunction, this Court
stayed the injunction and granted certiorari before judgment. Both
decisions were premised on the belief that Idaho would suffer
irreparable harm under the injunction and that these cases were
ready for the Court’s immediate determination. Since then, briefing
and oral argument have “shed more light on this case than in the
nature of things was afforded at the time” the Court considered
petitioners’ emergency applications. Belcher v.
Stengel, 429 U.S.
118, 119 (1976) (per curiam) (dismissed as
improvidently granted). I am now convinced that these cases are no
longer appropriate for early resolution.

															The parties dispute whether EMTALA requires
hospitals to provide abortions—or any other treatment forbidden by
state law—as necessary stabilizing care. They also disagree about
whether EMTALA, as a statute enacted under Congress’s spending
power and that operates on private parties, can preempt
state law (an issue aired for the first time in this Court). In my
judgment, it would be imprudent to answer these important questions
now. Since this suit began in the District Court, Idaho law has
significantly changed—twice. And since we granted certiorari, the
parties’ litigating positions have rendered the scope of the
dispute unclear, at best.

															In its stay application, Idaho argued that the
Government’s interpretation of EMTALA would render Idaho’s Act
virtually unenforceable. As Idaho understood it, the Government’s
theory would allow physicians to perform abortions whenever
necessary to avoid “ ‘serious jeopardy’ ” to the mother’s
mental health. Stay Reply Brief in No. 23A470, p. 6. On
that broad reading, Idaho projected that emergency rooms would
function as “federal abortion enclaves governed not by state law,
but by physician judgment, as enforced by the United States’s
mandate to perform abortions on demand.” Ibid. (citation
omitted). Idaho also warned that the Government’s interpretation
would “threate[n] religious healthcare providers” by forcing
doctors and hospitals to perform abortions regardless of conscience
objections. Id., at 15. Both of these points were relevant
to the Court’s assessment of the irreparable harm that Idaho would
suffer from the preliminary injunction, Nken v.
Holder, 556 U.S.
418, 434 (2009), as well as the need for “immediate
determination in this Court,” Supreme Court Rule 11.

															At the merits stage, however, the United States
disclaimed these interpretations of EMTALA. First, it emphatically
disavowed the notion that an abortion is ever required as
stabilizing treatment for mental health conditions. Brief for
United States 26, n. 5; Tr. of Oral Arg. 76–78. That is an
important concession: If restricted to conditions posing serious
jeopardy to a woman’s physical health, the Government’s reading of
EMTALA does not gut Idaho’s Act.[1] Second, the United States clarified that federal
conscience protections, for both hospitals and individual
physicians, apply in the EMTALA context. Tr. of Oral Arg. 87–89.
That is another critical point: It alleviates Idaho’s concern that
the Government’s interpretation of EMTALA would strip healthcare
providers of conscience protections.

															Narrowing happened from the other direction too.
The United States identified PPROM, placental abruption,
pre-eclampsia, and eclampsia as conditions for which EMTALA
requires an emergency abortion to be available. (The same
conditions that the Government’s witnesses identified—before
Idaho’s law changed.) But in this Court, petitioners represent that
the Act permits physicians to treat each of these conditions with
emergency abortions, even if the threat to the woman’s life is not
imminent. Reply Brief in No. 23–726, pp. 21–22; Reply Brief in
No. 23–727, pp. 8–9; Tr. of Oral Arg. 23. The same is true for
the conditions identified by the Government’s witnesses (severe
heart failure and sepsis). Reply Brief in No. 23–727,
pp. 8–9.

															A grant of certiorari before judgment presumes
that further proceedings below are unnecessary to the Court’s
resolution of the question presented. That was a miscalculation in
these cases, because the parties’ positions are still evolving. The
United States has clarified that EMTALA’s reach is far more modest
than it appeared when we granted certiorari and a stay. Idaho law
has materially changed since the District Court entered the
preliminary injunction, and, based on the parties’ arguments before
us, it seems that the framing of these cases has not had sufficient
opportunity to catch up. Cf. The Monrosa v. Carbon Black
Export, Inc., 359 U.S.
180, 184 (1959) (“Examination of a case on the merits, on oral
argument, may bring into ‘proper focus’ a consideration which,
though present in the record at the time of granting the writ, only
later indicates that the grant was improvident”).

															On top of that, petitioners have raised a
difficult and consequential argument, which they did not discuss in
their stay applications, about whether Congress, in reliance on the
Spending Clause, can obligate recipients of federal funds to
violate state criminal law. Brief for Petitioners in No. 23–726,
pp. 48–51; Reply Brief in No. 23–727, pp. 3–4; see also
Brief for Prolife Center at the University of St. Thomas as
Amicus Curiae. The District Court did not address this issue
below—nor did the Ninth Circuit, which we bypassed. We should not
jump ahead of the lower courts, particularly on an issue of such
importance. Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S.
709, 718, n. 7 (2005) (“[W]e are a court of review, not of
first view”); New York v. Uplinger, 467 U.S.
246, 251 (1984) (Stevens, J., concurring) (dismissing as
improvidently granted where “constitutional questions” would
otherwise be considered “premature[ly]”). The lower courts should
address the Spending Clause issue in the first instance.

															For these reasons, a “deviation from normal
appellate practice” in these cases has proved to be unwise. Supreme
Court Rule 11. I therefore agree that we should dismiss the writ of
certiorari as improvidently granted and permit proceedings to run
their course in the courts below.

															Having dismissed the writ, I also agree that we
should vacate the stay. As the party seeking emergency relief from
this Court, Idaho bore the burden of showing that it would be
“ ‘irreparably injured’ ” if the preliminary injunction
remained in effect. Nken, 556 U. S., at 434. The
Court’s grant of a stay reflected, among other things, its
determination that Idaho had satisfied that burden. Now, based on
the parties’ representations, it appears that the injunction will
not stop Idaho from enforcing its law in the vast majority of
circumstances.

															To be sure, the text of the two laws differs:
Idaho’s Act allows abortion only when “necessary to prevent the
death of the pregnant woman,” Idaho Code Ann. §18–622(2)(a)(i),
while EMTALA requires stabilizing care to prevent “serious
jeopardy” to the woman’s health, 42 U. S. C.
§1395dd(e)(1)(A)(i). But Idaho represents that its exception is
broader than the United States fears, and the United States
represents that EMTALA’s requirement is narrower than Idaho fears.
That matters in assessing Idaho’s irreparable harm for purposes of
the stay. The dramatic narrowing of the dispute—especially the
Government’s position on abortions to address mental health and
conscience exemptions for healthcare providers—has undercut the
conclusion that Idaho would suffer irreparable harm under the
preliminary injunction. Contrary to Idaho’s concerns at the stay
stage, the Government’s interpretation of EMTALA does not purport
to transform emergency rooms into “federal abortion enclaves
governed not by state law, but by physician judgment, as enforced
by the United States’s mandate to perform abortions on demand.”
Stay Reply Brief in No. 23A470, p. 6 (citation omitted). Nor
does it purport to deprive doctors and hospitals of conscience
protections. Cf. id., at 15. Thus, even with the preliminary
injunction in place, Idaho’s ability to enforce its law remains
almost entirely intact.

Notes
1
The United States also
clarified that if pregnancy seriously jeopardizes the woman’s
health postviability, EMTALA requires delivery, not abortion. Brief
for United States 10; Tr. of Oral Arg. 75. And it emphasized that
EMTALA requires abortion only in an “emergency acute medical
situation,” where a woman’s health is in jeopardy if she does not
receive an abortion “then and there.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 79–80. These
two temporal points also narrow the scope of EMTALA’s potential
conflict with Idaho’s Act.


