::decision_cite:: 23-726
::decision_name::  Moyle v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 23–726 and 23–727

															_________________

															Mike Moyle, Speaker of the Idaho House
of Representatives, et al., PETITIONERS

															23–726v.

															United States

															

															Idaho, PETITIONER

															23–727v.

															UNITED STATES

															on writs of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the ninth circuit

															[June 26, 2024]

															

															Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Sotomayor
joins, and with whom Justice Jackson joins as to Part II,
concurring.

															An Idaho law prohibits abortions unless
necessary to prevent a pregnant woman’s death; the law makes no
exception for abortions necessary to prevent grave harms to the
woman’s health, like the loss of her fertility. Before the law
could take effect, the Federal Government sued the State under the
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA). That law
requires a Medicare-funded hospital to provide essential care to
patients experiencing medical emergencies. The Government’s suit
contended that EMTALA preempts the Idaho abortion law in a narrow
class of cases: when the state law bars a hospital from performing
an abortion needed to prevent serious health harms.

															The District Court, believing the Government was
likely to prevail in its suit, entered a preliminary injunction.
During the year that the injunction was in place, women in Idaho
were able to obtain abortions in medical emergencies. Idaho
meanwhile sought to get the injunction lifted. When the en banc
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit declined to stay the
injunction, Idaho filed an emergency application here. This Court
stayed the injunction and granted the State’s petition for
certiorari before judgment. With that stay in effect, Idaho could
enforce its abortion ban even when terminating a pregnancy was
necessary to prevent grave harm to the woman. The on-the-ground
impact was immediate. To ensure appropriate medical care, the
State’s largest provider of emergency services had to airlift
pregnant women out of Idaho roughly every other week, compared to
once in all of the prior year (when the injunction was in effect).
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 66, 113.

															I concur in the Court’s decision today to vacate
its stay and dismiss the writ of certiorari before judgment as
improvidently granted. I do so because Idaho’s arguments about
EMTALA do not justify, and have never justified, either emergency
relief or our early consideration of this dispute. With this
Court’s writ of certiorari dismissed, the lower courts can proceed
with this litigation in the regular course. And with this Court’s
stay dissolved, the District Court’s preliminary injunction will
again take effect. That will prevent Idaho from enforcing its
abortion ban when the termination of a pregnancy is needed to
prevent serious harms to a woman’s health.

															I

															EMTALA requires hospitals to provide abortions
that Idaho’s law prohibits. When that is so, Idaho’s law is
preempted. The Court’s ruling today follows from those
premises.

															Federal law and Idaho law are in conflict about
the treatment of pregnant women facing health emergencies. EMTALA
requires a Medicare-funded hospital to offer an abortion when
needed to stabilize a medical condition that seriously threatens a
pregnant woman’s life or health. See 42 U. S. C. §1395dd.
Idaho allows abortions only when “necessary to prevent” a pregnant
woman’s “death.” Idaho Code Ann. §18–622(2)(a)(i) (Supp. 2023). By
their terms, the two laws differ. What falls in the gap between
them are cases in which continuing a pregnancy does not put a
woman’s life in danger, but still places her at risk of grave
health consequences, including loss of fertility. In that
situation, federal law requires a hospital to offer an abortion,
whereas Idaho law prohibits that emergency care. And the record
shows that, as a matter of medical reality, such cases exist. For
example, when a woman comes to an emergency room with PPROM, the
serious risk she faces may not be of death but of damage to her
uterus, preventing her from having children in the future. See 2
App. 594; see also id., at 615–616 (similar for
pre-eclampsia). Idaho has never suggested that its law would allow
an abortion in those circumstances. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 23
(stating that although the threat of death need not be
“imminen[t],” only that threat can justify an abortion); see also
id., at 25–28, 33–34. That is why hospitals in Idaho have
had to airlift medically fragile women to other States to receive
abortions needed to prevent serious harms to their health. See
id., at 66, 103–104, 113–115. Those transfers measure the
difference between the life-threatening conditions Idaho will allow
hospitals to treat and the health-threatening conditions it will
not, despite EMTALA’s command.

															Given that conflict, I agree with the Court’s
decision today to step back from its early intervention in this
dispute. In the first stage of this suit, the District Court
considered both sides’ medical evidence and entered a preliminary
injunction against Idaho’s law on the ground of preemption. See 623
F. Supp. 3d 1096, 1103–1105, 1110, 1117 (2022). After the
Idaho Supreme Court construed the law, the District Court revisited
its findings, and reaffirmed its entry of the injunction. See 2023
WL 3284977, *1, *5 (May 4, 2023). In line with standard practice,
that decision now can go to the Court of Appeals, and the District
Court can afterward consider further evidence and arguments for the
purpose of final judgment. Idaho is not entitled to anything more.
It mainly argues that EMTALA never requires a hospital to “offer
medical treatments that violate state law,” even when they are
needed to prevent substantial health harms. Tr. of Oral Arg. 4. In
my view, that understanding of EMTALA is not “likely to succeed on
the merits,” and so cannot support a stay of the injunction.
Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S.
418, 434 (2009). Neither does the State’s argument provide any
basis for this Court to short-circuit the proceedings below.
Today’s ruling thus puts the case back where it belongs, and with
the preliminary injunction in place.

															II

															Justice Alito’s dissenting opinion requires a
brief response. His primary argument is that although EMTALA
generally obligates hospitals to provide emergency medical care, it
never demands that they offer an abortion—no matter how much that
procedure is needed to prevent grave physical harm, or even death.
See post, at 4–15. That view has no basis in the
statute.

															EMTALA unambiguously requires that a
Medicare-funded hospital provide whatever medical treatment is
necessary to stabilize a health emergency—and an abortion, in rare
situations, is such a treatment. The statutory obligation kicks in
when an individual arrives at a hospital with an “emergency medical
condition,” which is one involving serious jeopardy to health.
§1395dd(e)(1)(A). The hospital must then “stabilize” the condition.
§1395dd(b)(1)(A). That means offering the medical treatment
necessary to ensure that “no material deterioration of the
condition” is likely to occur. §1395dd(e)(3)(A). The statute does
not list particular treatments—for example, defibrillation, blood
transfusion, or mechanical ventilation. What it instead requires is
the treatment that is medically appropriate to stabilize the
patient. And when a pregnancy goes terribly wrong, that treatment
may be an abortion. Termination of the pregnancy (which is often of
a non-viable fetus) may be the only way to prevent a woman’s death
or serious injury, including kidney failure or loss of fertility.
See 623 F. Supp. 3d, at 1101, 1103–1105. I do not understand
Justice Alito to dispute that medical fact. And from that fact, a
statutory obligation arises. It does not matter that EMTALA “does
not mention abortion.” Post, at 12; see post, at 5.
Neither, as just noted, does EMTALA mention any other treatment.
The statute simply requires the hospital to offer the treatment
necessary to prevent the emergency condition from spiraling
downward. And on rare occasions that means providing an
abortion.

															The statute’s references to protecting an
“unborn child” do not lead to a different result. Contrary to
Justice Alito’s view, none alters EMTALA’s command when a pregnancy
threatens the woman’s life or health. Three of the four provisions
Justice Alito cites concern the treatment of women in labor
(including all those with healthy pregnancies). Those provisions
ensure that a hospital, in considering the transfer of a woman to
another facility, takes account of risks to not only the woman but
also her “unborn child.” §1395dd(c)(1)(A)(ii), (2)(A),
(e)(1)(B)(ii). The provisions have no application to women who are
not in labor, but instead are experiencing a different
pregnancy-related condition. The fourth provision (included within
the definition of “emergency medical condition”) specifies that a
hospital must treat a condition that “plac[es] the health of the
individual (or, with respect to a pregnant woman, the health of the
woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy.”
§1395dd(e)(1)(A)(i). The parenthetical there, added in an amendment
to EMTALA, ensures that a woman with no health risks of her own can
demand emergency-room treatment if her fetus is in peril. It does
not displace the hospital’s duty to a woman whose life or health
is in jeopardy, and who needs an abortion to stabilize her
condition. Then, the statute requires offering that treatment to
the woman.[1]

															Because the Idaho law conflicts with that
requirement—prevents hospitals from doing what EMTALA commands—the
Court is right to dissolve its stay of the District Court’s
injunction. Doing so will again give Idaho women access to all the
needed medical treatments that EMTALA guarantees.

Notes
1
The amendment’s history
confirms that understanding. As originally enacted, EMTALA did not
obligate hospitals to provide medical care when a woman’s fetus,
but not the woman herself, was in peril. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 105
(Solicitor General describing “well-publicized cases” where women’s
“own health and life were not in danger, but the fetus was in grave
distress and hospitals weren’t treating them”). To fix that
problem, very large bipartisan majorities in both the House and the
Senate elected to broaden the provision, entitling a woman to
demand care for her unborn child as well as herself. See 103Stat.
2248; 135 Cong. Rec. 31431 (1989); id., at 31127;
id., at 24605; id., at 23393. The amendment would
likely have sparked far more opposition if it somehow tacitly
withdrew EMTALA’s requirement that hospitals treat women who need
an abortion to prevent death or serious harm.


