::decision_cite:: 23-939
::decision_name::  Trump v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Jackson
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–939

															_________________

															DONALD J. TRUMP, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Jackson, dissenting.

															Justice Sotomayor has thoroughly addressed the
Court’s flawed reasoning and conclusion as a matter of history,
tradition, law, and logic. I agree with every word of her powerful
dissent. I write separately to explain, as succinctly as I can, the
theoretical nuts and bolts of what, exactly, the majority has done
today to alter the paradigm of accountability for Presidents of the
United States. I also address what that paradigm shift means for
our Nation moving forward.

															I

															To fully appreciate the profound change the
majority has wrought, one must first acknowledge what it means to
have immunity from criminal prosecution. Put simply, immunity is
“exemption” from the duties and liabilities imposed by law. Black’s
Law Dictionary 898 (11th ed. 2019); see Hopkins v.
Clemson, 221 U.S.
636, 643 (1911) (explaining that immunity is “exemption from
legal process”). In its purest form, the concept of immunity boils
down to a maxim—“ ‘[t]he King can do no wrong’ ”—a notion
that was firmly “rejected at the birth of [our] Republic.”
Clinton v. Jones, 520 U.S.
681, 697, n. 24 (1997) (quoting 1 W. Blackstone,
Commentaries *246 (Blackstone)); see United States v.
Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 34 (No. 14,692d) (CC Va. 1807). To say
that someone is immune from criminal prosecution is to say that,
like a King, he “is not under the coercive power of the law,” which
“will not suppose him capable of committing a folly, much less a
crime.” 4 Blackstone *33. Thus, being immune is not like having a
defense under the law. Rather, it means that the law does
not apply to the immunized person in the first place. Conferring
immunity therefore “create[s] a privileged class free from
liability for wrongs inflicted or injuries threatened.”
Hopkins, 221 U. S., at 643.

															It is indisputable that immunity from liability
for wrongdoing is the exception rather than the rule in the
American criminal justice system. That is entirely unsurprising,
for the very idea of immunity stands in tension with foundational
principles of our system of Government. It is a core tenet of our
democracy that the People are the sovereign, and the Rule of Law is
our first and final security. “[F]rom their own experience and
their deep reading in history, the Founders knew that Law alone
saves a society from being rent by internecine strife or ruled by
mere brute power however disguised.” United States v.
Mine Workers, 330 U.S.
258, 308 (1947) (Frankfurter, J., concurring in judgment).

															A corollary to that principle sets the terms for
this case: “No man in this country is so high that he is above the
law. No officer of the law may set that law at defiance with
impunity. All the officers of the government, from the highest to
the lowest, are creatures of the law, and are bound to obey it.”
United States v. Lee, 106 U.S.
196, 220 (1882). We have long lived with the collective
understanding that “[d]ecency, security and liberty alike demand
that government officials shall be subjected to the same rules of
conduct that are commands to the citizen,” for “[i]n a government
of laws, existence of the government will be imperilled if it fails
to observe the law scrupulously.” Olmstead v. United
States, 277 U.S.
438, 485 (1928) (Brandeis, J., dissenting).

															II

															A

															These foundational presuppositions are
reflected in a procedural paradigm of rules and accountability that
operates in the realm of criminal law—what I would call an
individual accountability model.

															The basic contours of that model are familiar,
because they manifest in every criminal case. Criminal law starts
with an act of the legislature, which holds the power “to define a
crime, and ordain its punishment.” United States v.
Wiltberger, 5 Wheat. 76, 95 (1820); accord, Ohio v.
Johnson, 467 U.S.
493, 499 (1984). Criminal statutes are laws of general
applicability that express “the assent of the people’s
representatives” that certain conduct is off limits in our society.
Wooden v. United States, 595 U.S. 360, 391 (2022)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring in judgment).

															When the Federal Government believes that
someone has run afoul of a criminal statute and decides to exercise
its prosecutorial discretion to pursue punishment for that
violation, it persuades a grand jury that there is probable cause
to indict. U. S. Const., Amdt. 5. Then, the Government
marshals evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant engaged in the prohibited conduct and possessed the
requisite state of mind. See United States v. Bailey,
444 U.S.
394, 402 (1980) (observing that, to hold a person criminally
liable, “the concurrence of . . . ‘an evil-meaning mind
[and] an evil-doing hand’ ” must be proved (quoting
Morissette v. United States, 342
U.S. 246, 251 (1952))).

															For his part, the defendant “stands accused but
is presumed innocent until conviction upon trial or guilty plea.”
Betterman v. Montana, 578 U.S. 437, 441 (2016).
Notably, criminal defendants have various constitutionally
protected rights during the criminal-liability process, including
the rights to a speedy and public trial, the right to have a jury
decide guilt or innocence, the right to the assistance of counsel,
and the right to confront the witnesses against him. Amdt. 6. The
defendant also has at his disposal many means to defend himself
against the criminal charge. He can, of course, seek to hold the
Government to its burden of proof at trial. And even before trial,
in a motion to dismiss the indictment, he might make any number of
legal arguments; he can assert, for example, that the Government’s
charging document does not give adequate notice of the charge
against him or that the law he has been accused of violating is
unconstitutionally vague. See Hamling v. United
States, 418 U.S.
87, 117 (1974); United States v. Davis, 588 U.S.
445, 451 (2019). He might further claim that the law is
unconstitutional as applied to his particular conduct. See
United States v. O’Brien, 391
U.S. 367, 376 (1968). And he might maintain that his conduct,
even if proved, does not violate the law at issue. See,
e.g., Fischer v. United States, 603
U. S. ___, ___ (2024) (slip op., at 2).

															The defendant may also raise, and attempt to
prove, affirmative defenses that “excuse conduct that would
otherwise be punishable.” Dixon v. United States,
548 U.S.
1, 6 (2006). Generally speaking, affirmative defenses are
determinations (often adopted by legislation) that certain conduct
otherwise punishable by law is justified. This might be the case,
for example, when the Legislature determines that, under specified
circumstances, the societal harm particular conduct causes “is
outweighed by the need to avoid an even greater harm.” 1 P.
Robinson, Criminal Law Defenses §24(a) (1984) (Robinson).

															Importantly, a defense is not an
immunity, even though a defense can likewise result in a person
charged with a crime avoiding liability for his criminal conduct.
Consistent with our foundational norms, the individual
accountability model adheres to the presumption that the law
applies to all and that everyone must follow it; yet, the model
makes allowances for recognized defenses. One such defense is the
special privilege that Government officials sometimes invoke when
carrying out their official duties.[1]

															All of this is to say that our Government has
long functioned under an accountability paradigm in which no one is
above the law; an accused person is innocent until proven guilty;
and criminal defendants may raise defenses, both legal and factual,
tailored to their particular circumstances, whether they be
Government officials or ordinary citizens. For over two centuries,
our Nation has survived with these principles intact.

															B

															With that understanding of how our system of
accountability for criminal acts ordinarily functions, it becomes
much easier to see that the majority’s ruling in this case breaks
new and dangerous ground. Departing from the traditional model of
individual accountability, the majority has concocted something
entirely different: a Presidential accountability model that
creates immunity—an exemption from criminal law—applicable only to
the most powerful official in our Government.

															1

															So, how does this new Presidential
accountability model work? An initial problem is the lack of
clarity regarding what this new model entails. The majority
announces only its most basic contours. See ante, at 6
(asserting that “the nature of Presidential power requires that a
former President have some immunity from criminal prosecution for
official acts during his tenure in office”). Instead of no immunity
(the individual accountability model) or an unqualified grant of
absolute immunity for “all official acts,” Brief for
Petitioner 44 (emphasis added), the majority purports to adopt
something of a hybrid.[2] It
holds that a former President may or may not be immune from
criminal prosecution for conduct undertaken while in office, to be
determined on a case-by-case basis. According to the majority,
whether a former President is immune depends on how his criminal
conduct is classified, as among three possible categories.

															First, with respect to any criminal conduct
relating to a President’s “core constitutional powers”—those
subjects “within his ‘conclusive and preclusive’ constitutional
authority”—the President is entitled to absolute immunity from
criminal prosecution. See ante, at 6, 8. Second, expanding
outward from this “core,” regarding all other “acts within the
outer perimeter of [the President’s] official responsibility,” the
President is entitled to “at least a presumptive immunity
from criminal prosecution.” Ante, at 14. Third, if the
criminal conduct at issue comprises “unofficial acts, there is no
immunity.” Ante, at 15.[3]

															Applying the majority’s new Presidential
accountability model thus seems to involve bearing down on the
indictment’s allegations and making a series of determinations
about the nature of the conduct at issue. From the structure of the
paradigm, it appears that the first decision point is whether the
alleged criminal conduct involves one of the President’s “core”
powers. If so (and apparently regardless of the degree to which the
conduct implicates that core power), the President is absolutely
immune from criminal liability for engaging in that criminal
conduct. If not, then one must proceed to consider whether the
conduct qualifies as an “official” act or “unofficial” act of that
President. If the crime is an official act, the President is
presumptively immune from criminal prosecution and punishment. But
even then, immunity still hinges on whether there is any legal or
factual basis for concluding that the presumption of immunity has
been rebutted. Alternatively, if the charged conduct is an
unofficial act (a determination that, incidentally, courts must
make without considering the President’s motivations, ante,
at 18), the President is not immune.[4]

															2

															The majority’s multilayered, multifaceted
threshold parsing of the character of a President’s criminal
conduct differs from the individual accountability model in several
crucial respects. For one thing, it makes it next to impossible to
know ex ante when and under what circumstances a President
will be subject to accountability for his criminal acts. For every
allegation, courts must run this gauntlet first—no matter how well
documented or heinous the criminal act might be.

															Thus, even a hypothetical President who admits
to having ordered the assassinations of his political rivals or
critics, see, e.g., Tr. of Oral Arg. 9, or one who
indisputably instigates an unsuccessful coup, id., at 41–43,
has a fair shot at getting immunity under the majority’s new
Presidential accountability model. That is because whether a
President’s conduct will subject him to criminal liability turns on
the court’s evaluation of a variety of factors related to the
character of that particular act—specifically, those
characteristics that imbue an act with the status of “official” or
“unofficial” conduct (minus motive). In the end, then, under the
majority’s new paradigm, whether the President will be exempt from
legal liability for murder, assault, theft, fraud, or any other
reprehensible and outlawed criminal act will turn on whether he
committed that act in his official capacity, such that the answer
to the immunity question will always and inevitably be: It
depends.

															Under the individual accountability paradigm,
the accountability analysis is markedly less convoluted, and leads
to a more certain outcome. None of the same complications or
consequences arise, because, as I have explained, there are no
exemptions from the criminal law for any person, but every
defendant can assert whatever legal arguments and defenses might be
applicable under governing law. Since no one is above the law,
everyone can focus on what the law demands and permits, and on what
the defendant did or did not do; no one has to worry about
characterizing any criminal conduct as official or unofficial in
order to assess the applicability of an immunity at the outset.

															The majority’s new Presidential accountability
model is also distinct insofar as it accepts as a basic starting
premise that generally applicable criminal laws do not apply
to everyone in our society. In the majority’s view, while all other
citizens of the United States must do their jobs and live their
lives within the confines of criminal prohibitions, the President
cannot be made to do so; he must sometimes be exempt from the law’s
dictates depending on the character of his conduct. Indeed, the
majority holds that the President, unlike anyone else in our
country, is comparatively free to engage in criminal acts in
furtherance of his official duties.

															That point bears emphasizing. Immunity can issue
for Presidents under the majority’s model even for unquestionably
and intentionally egregious criminal behavior. Regardless of the
nature or the impact of the President’s criminal conduct, so long
as he is committing crimes “pursuant to the powers invested
exclusively in him by the Constitution,” ante, at 7, or as
needed “to carry out his constitutional duties without undue
caution,” ante, at 14, he is likely to be deemed immune from
prosecution.[5]

															Ultimately, the majority’s model simply sets the
criminal law to one side when it comes to crimes allegedly
committed by the President. Before accountability can be sought or
rendered, the Judiciary serves as a newfound special gatekeeper,
charged not merely with interpreting the law but with policing
whether it applies to the President at all. Also, under the
new Presidential accountability model, the starting presumption is
that the criminal law does not apply to Presidents, no
matter how obviously illegal, harmful, or unacceptable a
President’s official behavior might be. Regardless of all that,
courts must now ensure that a former President is not held
accountable for any criminal conduct he engages in while he is on
duty, unless his conduct consists primarily (and perhaps solely) of
unofficial acts.

															3

															The structure and function of the two
accountability paradigms are not the only differences—the models
also assign different roles to participants in the criminal justice
system, and they ultimately generate different relationships
between the Presidency and the Rule of Law.

															Under the individual accountability model,
duty-bound prosecutorial officers initially exercise their
discretion to decide whether to seek punishment for alleged
violations of criminal law (a determination that is made based on
numerous factors). And even if prosecutors decide to bring a
charge, a jury of the criminal defendant’s peers ultimately
determines whether that defendant (including a former President)
will actually be held to account for having engaged in unlawful
conduct, after the court has resolved any legal challenges and has
instructed the jury as to the requirements of the law.

															By contrast, under the majority’s new
Presidential accountability paradigm, what a prosecutor or jury
does may not even matter, since the courts take center stage once
charges are brought against a former President, marshaling their
resources to conduct a complex and amorphous threshold immunity
evaluation. Whether a former President will be entirely exempted
from the dictates of the law (such that the roles of other
participants in the criminal justice process become irrelevant)
requires a judicial assessment, in the first instance, of his
criminal conduct and the circumstances under which he acted.

															Finally, and most importantly, recall that under
the individual accountability model, an indicted former President
can raise an affirmative defense just like any other criminal
defendant. This means that the President remains answerable to the
law, insofar as he must show that he was justified in committing a
criminal act while in office under the given circumstances. In
other words, while the President might indeed be privileged to
commit a crime in the course of his official duties, any such
privilege exists only when the People (acting either through their
elected representatives or as members of a jury) determine that the
former President’s conduct was in fact justified, notwithstanding
the general criminal prohibition.

															Under the majority’s immunity regime, by
contrast, the President can commit crimes in the course of his job
even under circumstances in which no one thinks he has any
excuse; the law simply does not apply to him. Unlike a
defendant who invokes an affirmative defense and relies on a legal
determination that there was a good reason for his otherwise
unlawful conduct, a former President invoking immunity relies on
the premise that he can do whatever he wants, however he wants, so
long as he uses his “ ‘official power’ ” in doing so.
Ante, at 19. In the former paradigm, the President remains
subject to law; in the latter, he is above it.

															III

															Justice Sotomayor has already warned of the
dire consequences that are likely to follow from the majority’s
decision in this case. Ante, at 29–30 (dissenting opinion).
I have thus far endeavored merely to explain what today’s ruling
amounts to on a theoretical level: the Court’s abandonment of the
individual accountability model as applied to Presidents, and its
introduction of a new Presidential accountability model that
authorizes the Judiciary to exempt Presidents from punishment under
law, depending on the official or unofficial character of the
criminal conduct at issue.

															Here, I will highlight just two observations
about the results that follow from this paradigm shift. First, by
changing the accountability paradigm in this fashion, the Court has
unilaterally altered the balance of power between the three
coordinate branches of our Government as it relates to the Rule of
Law, aggrandizing power in the Judiciary and the Executive, to the
detriment of Congress. Second, the majority’s new Presidential
accountability model undermines the constraints of the law as a
deterrent for future Presidents who might otherwise abuse their
power, to the detriment of us all.

															A

															Consider the structural implications of
today’s decision from the standpoint of the separation of powers.
Until now, Congress’s laws, passed by the representatives of the
People, bound the People and their elected officials just the same.
Law, we have explained, “is the only supreme power in our system of
government, and every man who by accepting office participates in
its functions is only the more strongly bound to submit to that
supremacy, and to observe the limitations which it imposes upon the
exercise of the authority which it gives.” Lee, 106
U. S., at 220. With its adoption of a paradigm that sometimes
exempts the President from the dictates of the law (when the Court
says so), this Court has effectively snatched from the Legislature
the authority to bind the President (or not) to Congress’s
mandates, and it has also thereby substantially augmented the power
of both the Office of the Presidency and itself.

															As to the former, it should go without saying
that the Office of the Presidency, the apex of the Executive
Branch, is made significantly more powerful when the constraints of
the criminal law are lifted with respect to the exercise of a
President’s official duties. After today’s ruling, the President
must still “take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,”
Art. II, §3; yet, when acting in his official capacity, he has
no obligation to follow those same laws himself.

															But whatever additional power the majority’s new
Presidential accountability model gives to the Presidency, it gives
doubly to the Court itself, for the majority provides no meaningful
guidance about how to apply this new paradigm or how to categorize
a President’s conduct. For instance, its opinion lists some
examples of the “core” constitutional powers with respect to which
the President is now entitled to absolute immunity—a list that
apparently includes the removal power, the power to recognize
foreign nations, and the pardon power. Ante, at 6–9.
However, the majority does not—and likely cannot—supply any useful
or administrable definition of the scope of that “core.” For what
it’s worth, the Constitution’s text is no help either; Article II
does not contain a Core Powers Clause.[6] So the actual metes and bounds of the “core”
Presidential powers are really anyone’s guess.

															Nor does the majority explain how to
consistently distinguish between official and unofficial acts.
Quite the opposite, in fact. While acknowledging that this is a
critical line that courts must draw in order for its new
accountability model to work properly, the majority simultaneously
cautions that making this distinction “can be difficult”—likely a
gross understatement given the recognized “breadth of the
President’s ‘discretionary responsibilities’ under the Constitution
and laws of the United States.” Ante, at 17. The majority
likewise provides no guidance as to when, how, or why the
President’s “presumptive” immunity for noncore official acts might
be rebutted, saying only that applying the criminal law to a
President’s acts must pose “no ‘dangers of intrusion on the
authority and functions of the Executive Branch.’ ”
Ante, at 14 (quoting Nixon v. Fitzgerald,
457 U.S.
731, 754 (1982)).

															At most, to distinguish official from unofficial
conduct, the majority advises asking whether the former President’s
conduct was “ ‘manifestly or palpably beyond [his]
authority.’ ” Ante, at 17 (quoting Blassingame
v. Trump, 87 F. 4th 1, 13 (CADC 2023)). But that test
can be illusory, as is evidenced by the facts alleged in this very
case. With respect to the indictment’s allegations concerning
petitioner’s attempt to assemble false slates of electors in
conjunction with the events of January 6, 2021, for example, the
majority admits that the “alleged conduct cannot be neatly
categorized,” and that “[t]he analysis therefore . . .
may prove to be challenging.” Ante, at 28–29. With that, at
least, I could not agree more.

															This much is clear: Before today, none of these
kinds of inquiries was necessary for criminal liability to be
fairly assessed with respect to persons accused of having engaged
in criminal conduct. And, frankly, none is needed now—except as
relates to the President under the new paradigm the majority has
crafted.

															Perhaps even more troubling, while Congress (the
branch of our Government most accountable to the People) is the
entity our Constitution tasks with deciding, as a general matter,
what conduct is on or off limits, the Court has now arrogated that
power unto itself when that question pertains to the President. In
essence, the Court has now imposed its own preclearance requirement
on the application of Congress’s laws to a former President alleged
to have committed crimes while in office. Who will be responsible
for drawing the crucial “ ‘line between [the President’s]
personal and official affairs’ ”? Ante, at 29. To ask
the question is to know the answer. A majority of this Court,
applying an indeterminate test, will pick and choose which laws
apply to which Presidents, by labeling his various allegedly
criminal acts as “core,” “official,” or “manifestly or palpably”
beyond the President’s authority.

															Ironically, then, while purportedly seeking to
transcend politics, see ante, at 41–42, the Court today
displaces the independent judgments of the political branches about
the circumstances under which the criminal law should apply.
Effectively, the Court elbows out of the way both Congress and
prosecutorial authorities within the Executive Branch, making
itself the indispensable player in all future attempts to hold
former Presidents accountable to generally applicable criminal
laws. “The Framers, however, did not make the judiciary the
overseer of our government.” Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
v. Sawyer, 343 U.S.
579, 594 (1952) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). To be sure, this
Court may sometimes “have to intervene in determining where
authority lies as between the democratic forces in our scheme of
government.” Id., at 597. But it has long been understood
that “we should be wary and humble” when doing so. Ibid.

															The majority displays no such caution or
humility now. Instead, the Court today transfers from the political
branches to itself the power to decide when the President can be
held accountable. What is left in its wake is a greatly weakened
Congress, which must stand idly by as the President disregards its
criminal prohibitions and uses the powers of his office to push the
envelope, while choosing to follow (or not) existing laws, as he
sees fit. We also now have a greatly empowered Court, which can opt
to allow Congress’s policy judgments criminalizing conduct to stand
(or not) with respect to a former President, as a matter of its own
prerogative.

															B

															If the structural consequences of today’s
paradigm shift mark a step in the wrong direction, then the
practical consequences are a five-alarm fire that threatens to
consume democratic self-governance and the normal operations of our
Government. The majority shoos away this possibility. Ante,
at 37 (accusing the dissents of “strik[ing] a tone of chilling doom
that is wholly disproportionate to what the Court actually does
today”). But Justice Sotomayor makes this point plain, see
ante, at 29–30, and I will not belabor it.

															Here, I will merely observe that, from a
theoretical perspective, philosophers have long considered
deterrence to be a key justification for adopting and maintaining
systems that ensure accountability for criminal conduct.[7] For that same reason, some
commentators also maintain that decreasing the certainty of
accountability for wrongful acts at least arguably reduces
incentives to follow the law.[8]

															Under the individual accountability model,
because everyone is subject to the law, the potential of criminal
liability operates as a constraint on the actions and decisions of
everyone, including the President. After today, that reality is no
more. Consequently, our Nation has lost a substantial check on
Presidents who would use their official powers to commit crimes
with impunity while in office.

															So, one might ask, what remains of
accountability for Presidents under law? With today’s paradigm
shift, the majority leaves in place only the chance that this Court
might someday determine that the criminal conduct in question was
an “unofficial” act, or that the Government will somehow rebut the
presumption of immunity that applies to a President’s official
acts, such that criminal consequences might attach. But with the
parameters of official and unofficial conduct unknown, I think it
highly unlikely that a sitting President would feel constrained by
these remote possibilities.

															All of this leads me to ponder why, exactly, has
the majority concluded that an indeterminate
“core”-versus-“official”-versus-“unofficial” line-drawing exercise
is the better way to address potential criminal acts of a
President? Could it be that the majority believes the obviously
grave dangers of shifting from the individual accountability model
to the Presidential accountability model might nevertheless be
offset by the great benefits of doing so? Cf. J. Bentham, A
Fragment on Government and an Introduction to the Principles of
Morals and Legislation 3 (W. Harrison ed. 1948) (arguing that acts
can be justified by the maxim that “it is the greatest happiness of
the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong”
(emphasis deleted)).

															Some of the majority’s analysis suggests as
much. As far as I can tell, the majority is mostly concerned that,
without immunity, Presidents might “be chilled from taking the
‘bold and unhesitating action’ required of an independent
Executive.” Ante, at 13. The Court’s opinion candidly
laments that application of the law to Presidents might not be
evenhanded, and that, as a result, Presidents might be less
“ ‘vigorous’ and ‘energetic’ ” as executive officers.
Ante, at 10; accord, ante, at 39. But that concern
ignores (or rejects) the foundational principles upon which the
traditional individual accountability paradigm is based. Worse
still, promoting more vigor from Presidents in exercising their
official duties—and, presumably, less deliberation—invites
breathtaking risks in terms of harm to the American people that, in
my view, far outweigh the benefits.

															This is not to say that the majority is wrong
when it perceives that it can be cumbersome for a President to have
to follow the law while carrying out his duty to enforce it. It is
certainly true that “[a] scheme of government like ours no doubt at
times feels the lack of power to act with complete, all-embracing,
swiftly moving authority.” Youngstown, 343 U. S., at
613 (Frankfurter, J., concurring). But any American who has studied
history knows that “our government was designed to have such
restrictions.” Ibid. (emphasis added). Our Constitution’s
“separation of powers was adopted by the Convention of 1787, not to
promote efficiency but to preclude the exercise of arbitrary power.
The purpose was, not to avoid friction, but . . . to save
the people from autocracy.” Myers v. United States,
272 U.S.
52, 293 (1926) (Brandeis, J., dissenting).

															Having now cast the shadow of doubt over when—if
ever—a former President will be subject to criminal liability for
any criminal conduct he engages in while on duty, the majority
incentivizes all future Presidents to cross the line of criminality
while in office, knowing that unless they act “manifestly or
palpably beyond [their] authority,” ante, at 17, they will
be presumed above prosecution and punishment alike.

															But the majority also tells us not to worry,
because “[l]ike everyone else, the President is subject to
prosecution in his unofficial capacity.” Ante, at 40
(emphasis added). This attempted reassurance is cold comfort, even
setting aside the fact that the Court has neglected to lay out a
standard that reliably distinguishes between a President’s official
and unofficial conduct. Why? Because there is still manifest
inequity: Presidents alone are now free to commit crimes when they
are on the job, while all other Americans must follow the law in
all aspects of their lives, whether personal or professional. The
official-versus-unofficial act distinction also seems both
arbitrary and irrational, for it suggests that the unofficial
criminal acts of a President are the only ones worthy of
prosecution. Quite to the contrary, it is when the President
commits crimes using his unparalleled official powers that the
risks of abuse and autocracy will be most dire. So, the fact that,
“unlike anyone else, the President is” vested with “sweeping powers
and duties,” ibid., actually underscores, rather than
undermines, the grim stakes of setting the criminal law to the side
when the President flexes those very powers.

															The vision John Adams enshrined in the
Massachusetts Declaration of Rights—“ ‘a government of laws
and not of men’ ”—speaks directly to this concept. Mine
Workers, 330 U. S., at 307 (Frankfurter, J., concurring in
judgment). Adams characterized that document as an homage to the
Rule of Law; it reflected both a flat “rejection in positive terms
of rule by fiat” and a solemn promise that “[e]very act of
government may be challenged by an appeal to law.” Id., at
308. Thanks to the majority, that vision and promise are likely to
be fleeting in the future. From this day forward, Presidents of
tomorrow will be free to exercise the Commander-in-Chief powers,
the foreign-affairs powers, and all the vast law enforcement powers
enshrined in Article II however they please—including in ways that
Congress has deemed criminal and that have potentially grave
consequences for the rights and liberties of Americans.

															IV

															To the extent that the majority’s new
accountability paradigm allows Presidents to evade punishment for
their criminal acts while in office, the seeds of absolute power
for Presidents have been planted. And, without a doubt, absolute
power corrupts absolutely. “If one man can be allowed to determine
for himself what is law, every man can. That means first chaos,
then tyranny.” Id., at 312. Likewise, “[i]f the Government
becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every
man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy.”
Olmstead, 277 U. S., at 485 (Brandeis, J., dissenting).
I worry that, after today’s ruling, our Nation will reap what this
Court has sown.

															Stated simply: The Court has now declared for
the first time in history that the most powerful official in the
United States can (under circumstances yet to be fully determined)
become a law unto himself. As we enter this uncharted territory,
the People, in their wisdom, will need to remain ever attentive,
consistently fulfilling their established role in our
constitutional democracy, and thus collectively serving as the
ultimate safeguard against any chaos spawned by this Court’s
decision. For, like our democracy, our Constitution is “the
creature of their will, and lives only by their will.”
Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 389 (1821).

															For my part, I simply cannot abide the
majority’s senseless discarding of a model of accountability for
criminal acts that treats every citizen of this country as being
equally subject to the law—as the Rule of Law requires. That core
principle has long prevented our Nation from devolving into
despotism. Yet the Court now opts to let down the guardrails of the
law for one extremely powerful category of citizen: any future
President who has the will to flout Congress’s established
boundaries.

															In short, America has traditionally relied on
the law to keep its Presidents in line. Starting today, however,
Americans must rely on the courts to determine when (if at all) the
criminal laws that their representatives have enacted to promote
individual and collective security will operate as speedbumps to
Presidential action or reaction. Once self-regulating, the Rule of
Law now becomes the rule of judges, with courts pronouncing which
crimes committed by a President have to be let go and which can be
redressed as impermissible. So, ultimately, this Court itself will
decide whether the law will be any barrier to whatever course of
criminality emanates from the Oval Office in the future. The
potential for great harm to American institutions and Americans
themselves is obvious.

															*  *  *

															The majority of my colleagues seems to have put
their trust in our Court’s ability to prevent Presidents from
becoming Kings through case-by-case application of the
indeterminate standards of their new Presidential accountability
paradigm. I fear that they are wrong. But, for all our sakes, I
hope that they are right.

															In the meantime, because the risks (and power)
the Court has now assumed are intolerable, unwarranted, and plainly
antithetical to bedrock constitutional norms, I dissent.

Notes
1
  See R. Perkins & R.
Boyce, Criminal Law 1093 (3d ed. 1982) (“Deeds which otherwise
would be criminal, such as taking or destroying property, taking
hold of a person by force and against his will, placing him in
confinement, or even taking his life, are not crimes if done with
proper public authority”); see also 2 Robinson §141(a) (describing
the public-authority defense, under which a defendant may escape
liability if he “has been specifically authorized to engage in the
conduct constituting the offense in order to protect or further a
public interest”); Brief for United States 29–30, n. 11;
ante, at 16, n. 3 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (citing
Nardone v. United States, 302
U.S. 379, 384 (1937)).
2
 Its feigned judicial
humility notwithstanding, see ante, at 41, the majority’s
holding goes further—much further—than necessary to resolve
this case. Petitioner’s argument in both the lower courts and this
one was that a former President is categorically immune from
federal criminal prosecution for “all” acts within the outer
perimeter of his official duties. See Opening Brief for
Defendant-Appellant in No. 23–3228 (CADC, Dec. 23, 2023),
p. 23; 91 F. 4th 1173, 1188–1189, 1195, 1208 (CADC 2024)
(per curiam); Brief for Petitioner 41–47 (arguing for
absolute immunity for “all actions within the ‘outer
perimeter’ ” of a President’s responsibilities, and imploring
the Court not to adopt a “ ‘function-based’ approach”). Thus,
it would have been enough for the Court simply to reject
petitioner’s categorical claim and leave it at that. But the
majority sua sponte rephrased the question presented,
and it now takes full advantage of this opportunity to devise from
whole cloth an entirely new legal framework for judicial evaluation
of potential criminal immunity for former Presidents.
3
 It is important to note
that the majority reframes the immunity question presented here as
a separation of powers concern that is compelled by Article II—as
if what is being asked is whether Congress can criminalize
executive prerogatives. See, e.g., ante, at 6–7; see
also ante, at 1–2 (Barrett, J., concurring in part). But
that is not anywhere close to what is happening in this case. No
one maintains that Congress has passed a law that specifically
criminalizes the President’s use of any power that the Constitution
vests exclusively in the Executive, much less that the Judiciary is
being conscripted to adjudicate the propriety of such a statute. To
the contrary, the indictment here invokes criminal statutes of
general applicability that everyone is supposed to follow, both on
and off the job. So, the real question is: Can the President, too,
be held accountable for committing crimes while he is undertaking
his official duties? The nature of his authority under Article II
(whether conclusive and preclusive, or shared with Congress, or
otherwise) is entirely beside the point.
4
 Justice Barrett’s version
of the Presidential accountability paradigm works slightly
differently; she would have us ask, first, “whether the relevant
criminal statute reaches the President’s official conduct.”
Ante, at 2. But, again, what is at issue here are statutes
of general applicability—they only “reach” the President’s conduct
to the extent that he chooses to engage in the prohibited behavior.
See n. 3, supra. Justice Barrett’s framing, thus,
sidesteps the fact that, when immunity is being considered, what is
actually at issue is whether the President is exempt from
punishment if he opts to exercise his official duties using means
that violate criminal law.
5
 To fully appreciate the
oddity of making the criminal immunity determination turn on the
character of the President’s responsibilities, consider what the
majority says is one of the President’s “conclusive and preclusive”
prerogatives: “ ‘[t]he President’s power to remove
. . . those who wield executive power on his
behalf.’ ” Ante, at 8 (quoting Seila Law LLC v.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 591 U.S. 197, 204
(2020)). While the President may have the authority to decide to
remove the Attorney General, for example, the question here is
whether the President has the option to remove the Attorney General
by, say, poisoning him to death. Put another way, the issue here is
not whether the President has exclusive removal power, but whether
a generally applicable criminal law prohibiting murder can restrict
how the President exercises that authority.
6
 Some of the powers the
majority designates as “core” powers are, at best, implied from
indefinite constitutional language. See, e.g.,
Seila Law, 591 U. S., at 268–269 (Kagan, J., concurring
in judgment with respect to severability and dissenting in part)
(“Nowhere does the text say anything about the President’s power to
remove subordinate officials at will”); Zivotofsky v.
Kerry, 576 U.S.
1, 11 (2015) (“[T]he Constitution does not use the term
‘recognition,’ either in Article II or elsewhere”); id., at
63 (Roberts, C. J., dissenting) (calling the “asserted textual
bases” for an exclusive Presidential recognition power
“tenuous”).
7
 See, e.g.,
Plato, Laws 274 (B. Jowett transl. 2000) (“Not that he is punished
because he did wrong, for that which is done can never be undone,
but in order that in future times, he, and those who see him
corrected, may utterly hate injustice, or at any rate abate much of
their evil-doing”); see also J. Bentham, The Rationale of
Punishment 20 (1830) (“General prevention ought to be the chief end
of punishment, as it is its real justification”); A. von Hirsch,
Doing Justice: The Choice of Punishments 44 (1976) (“The threat and
imposition of punishment is called for in order to secure
compliance—not full compliance, but more compliance than there
might be were there no legal penalties at all”).
8
 See, e.g.,
M. Ryan, Taking Another Look at Second-Look Sentencing, 81 Brooklyn
L. Rev. 149, 156, and n. 37 (2015) (“[U]ndermining the
. . . certainty of punishment . . . could
undermine the deterrence value of punishment”).


