::decision_cite:: 23-939
::decision_name::  Trump v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–939

															_________________

															DONALD J. TRUMP, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Thomas, concurring.

															Few things would threaten our constitutional
order more than criminally prosecuting a former President for his
official acts. Fortunately, the Constitution does not permit us to
chart such a dangerous course. As the Court forcefully explains,
the Framers “deemed an energetic executive essential to
. . . the security of liberty,” and our “system of
separated powers” accordingly insulates the President from
prosecution for his official acts. Ante, at 10, 42 (internal
quotation marks omitted). To conclude otherwise would hamstring the
vigorous Executive that our Constitution envisions. “While the
separation of powers may prevent us from righting every wrong, it
does so in order to ensure that we do not lose liberty.”
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S.
654, 710–711 (1988) (Scalia, J., dissenting).

															I write separately to highlight another way in
which this prosecution may violate our constitutional structure. In
this case, the Attorney General purported to appoint a private
citizen as Special Counsel to prosecute a former President on
behalf of the United States. But, I am not sure that any office for
the Special Counsel has been “established by Law,” as the
Constitution requires. Art. II, §2, cl. 2. By requiring
that Congress create federal offices “by Law,” the Constitution
imposes an important check against the President—he cannot create
offices at his pleasure. If there is no law establishing the office
that the Special Counsel occupies, then he cannot proceed with this
prosecution. A private citizen cannot criminally prosecute anyone,
let alone a former President.

															No former President has faced criminal
prosecution for his acts while in office in the more than 200 years
since the founding of our country. And, that is so despite numerous
past Presidents taking actions that many would argue constitute
crimes. If this unprecedented prosecution is to proceed, it must be
conducted by someone duly authorized to do so by the American
people. The lower courts should thus answer these essential
questions concerning the Special Counsel’s appointment before
proceeding.

															I

															The Constitution sets forth how an office may
be created and how it may be filled. The Appointments Clause
provides:

															“[The President] shall nominate, and by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the
supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose
Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall
be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest the
Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the
President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of
Department.” Art. II, §2, cl. 2.

															The constitutional process for filling an office
is plain from this text. The default manner for appointing
“Officers of the United States” is nomination by the President and
confirmation by the Senate. Ibid. “But the Clause provides a
limited exception for the appointment of inferior officers:
Congress may ‘by Law’ authorize” one of three specified actors “to
appoint inferior officers without the advice and consent of the
Senate.” NLRB v. SW General, Inc., 580 U.S. 288, 312
(2017) (Thomas, J., concurring). As relevant here, a “Hea[d] of
Department”—such as the Attorney General—is one such actor that
Congress may authorize “by Law” to appoint inferior officers
without senatorial confirmation. Art. II, §2, cl. 2.

															Before the President or a Department Head can
appoint any officer, however, the Constitution requires that the
underlying office be “established by Law.”[1] The Constitution itself creates some offices, most
obviously that of the President and Vice President. See §1.
Although the Constitution contemplates that there will be “other
Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for,” it clearly requires that those offices
“shall be established by Law.” §2, cl. 2. And, “established by
law” refers to an office that Congress creates “by statute.”
Lucia v. SEC, 585 U.S. 237, 254 (2018) (Thomas, J.,
concurring); see also United States v. Maurice, 26 F.
Cas. 1211, 1213 (No. 15,747) (CC Va. 1823) (Marshall,
C. J.).

															The limitation on the President’s power to
create offices grew out of the Founders’ experience with the
English monarchy. The King could wield significant power by both
creating and filling offices as he saw fit. He was “emphatically
and truly styled the fountain of honor. He not only appoint[ed] to
all offices, but [could] create offices.” The Federalist No. 69,
p. 421 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961); see also 1 W. Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England 271 (T. Cooley ed. 1871) (“[A]s
the king may create new titles, so may he create new offices”).
That ability to create offices raised many “concerns about the
King’s ability to amass too much power”; the King could both create
a multitude of offices and then fill them with his supporters. J.
Mascott, Who Are “Officers of the United States”? 70 Stan.
L. Rev. 443, 492 (2018) (Mascott); see also G. Wood, The
Creation of the American Republic 1776–1787, p. 143 (1969)
(describing “the power of appointment to offices” as “the most
insidious and powerful weapon of eighteenth-century despotism”); T.
Paine, Common Sense (1776), reprinted in The Great Works of Thomas
Paine 11 (1877) (explaining that “the crown . . . derives
its whole consequence merely from being the giver of places and
pensions”). In fact, one of the grievances raised by the American
colonists in declaring their independence was that the King “ha[d]
erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of
Officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.”
Declaration of Independence ¶12. The Founders thus drafted the
Constitution with “evidently a great inferiority in the power of
the President, in this particular, to that of the British king.”
The Federalist No. 69, at 421.

															The Founders broke from the monarchial model by
giving the President the power to fill offices (with the
Senate’s approval), but not the power to create offices.
They did so by “imposing the constitutional requirement that new
officer positions be ‘established by Law’ rather than through a
King-like custom of the head magistrate unilaterally creating new
offices.” Mascott 492–493 (footnote omitted); see also 1 Annals of
Cong. 581–582 (1789) (“The powers relative to offices are partly
Legislative and partly Executive. The Legislature creates the
office, defines the powers, limits its duration, and annexes a
compensation”); see also ibid. (describing the power to
“designat[e] the man to fill the office” as “of an Executive
nature”). The Constitution thus “giv[es] Congress broad authority
to establish and organize the Executive Branch.” Seila Law
LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 591 U.S.
197, 266 (2020) (Kagan, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part). By keeping the ability to create offices out
of the President’s hands, the Founders ensured that no President
could unilaterally create an army of officer positions to then fill
with his supporters. Instead, our Constitution leaves it in the
hands of the people’s elected representatives to determine whether
new executive offices should exist.

															Longstanding practice from the founding to today
comports with this original understanding that Congress must create
offices by law. The First Congress, for instance, routinely and
explicitly created offices by statute. See, e.g.,
§35, 1Stat. 92–93 (creating the offices of Attorney General and
U. S. Attorney for each district); see also §§1–2, id.,
at 50 (creating offices of Secretary of War and his Chief Clerk);
ch. 12, §1, id., at 65 (creating offices within the
Department of Treasury for Secretary of the Treasury, a
Comptroller, Auditor, Treasurer, Register, and Assistant to the
Secretary). Still today, Congress creates the offices that the
Executive Branch may fill. For example, Congress has created
several offices within the Department of Justice, including the
offices of the Attorney General, Deputy Attorney General, Associate
Attorney General, Solicitor General, and Assistant Attorneys
General. See 28 U. S. C. §§503–506. For some agencies,
Congress has also granted the agency head the power to “appoint
such officers and employees . . . as are necessary to
execute the functions vested in him.” 7 U. S. C. §610(a)
(Department of Agriculture); see also, e.g., 20
U. S. C. §3461 (Department of Education); 42
U. S. C. §913 (Department of Health and Human
Services).

															In the past, Congress has at times expressly
created offices similar to the position now occupied by the Special
Counsel. Congress created an office for a “special counsel” to
investigate the Teapot Dome Scandal and pursue prosecutions. See
ch. 16, 43Stat. 6. And, a statute provided for “the appointment of
an independent counsel” that we addressed in Morrison v.
Olson. See 28 U. S. C. §592. That statute lapsed,
and Congress has not since reauthorized the appointment of an
independent counsel. See §599.[2]

															We cannot ignore the importance that the
Constitution places on who creates a federal office. To
guard against tyranny, the Founders required that a federal office
be “established by Law.” As James Madison cautioned, “[i]f there is
any point in which the separation of the Legislative and Executive
powers ought to be maintained with greater caution, it is that
which relates to officers and offices.” 1 Annals of Cong. 581. If
Congress has not reached a consensus that a particular office
should exist, the Executive lacks the power to create and fill an
office of his own accord.

															II

															It is difficult to see how the Special Counsel
has an office “established by Law,” as required by the
Constitution. When the Attorney General appointed the Special
Counsel, he did not identify any statute that clearly creates such
an office. See Dept. of Justice Order No. 5559–2022 (Nov. 18,
2022). Nor did he rely on a statute granting him the authority to
appoint officers as he deems fit, as the heads of some other
agencies have.[3] See
supra, at 5. Instead, the Attorney General relied upon
several statutes of a general nature. See Order No. 5559–2022
(citing 28 U. S. C. §§509, 510, 515, 533).

															None of the statutes cited by the Attorney
General appears to create an office for the Special Counsel, and
especially not with the clarity typical of past statutes used for
that purpose. See, e.g., 43Stat. 6 (“[T]he President
is further authorized and directed to appoint . . .
special counsel who shall have charge and control of the
prosecution of such litigation”). Sections 509 and 510 are generic
provisions concerning the functions of the Attorney General and his
ability to delegate authority to “any other officer, employee, or
agency.” Section 515 contemplates an “attorney specially appointed
by the Attorney General under law,” thereby suggesting that
such an attorney’s office must have already been created by some
other law. (Emphasis added.) As for §533, it provides that “[t]he
Attorney General may appoint officials . . . to
detect and prosecute crimes against the United States.” (Emphasis
added.) It is unclear whether an “official” is equivalent to an
“officer” as used by the Constitution. See Lucia, 585
U. S., at 254–255 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (considering the
meaning of “officer”). Regardless, this provision would be a
curious place for Congress to hide the creation of an office for a
Special Counsel. It is placed in a chapter concerning the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (§§531–540d), not the separate chapters
concerning U. S. Attorneys (§§541–550) or the now-lapsed
Independent Counsel (§§591–599).[4]

															To be sure, the Court gave passing reference to
the cited statutes as supporting the appointment of the Special
Prosecutor in United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S.
683, 694 (1974), but it provided no analysis of those
provisions’ text. Perhaps there is an answer for why these statutes
create an office for the Special Counsel. But, before this
consequential prosecution proceeds, we should at least provide a
fulsome explanation of why that is so.

															Even if the Special Counsel has a valid office,
questions remain as to whether the Attorney General filled that
office in compliance with the Appointments Clause. For example, it
must be determined whether the Special Counsel is a principal or
inferior officer. If the former, his appointment is invalid because
the Special Counsel was not nominated by the President and
confirmed by the Senate, as principal officers must be. Art. II,
§2, cl. 2. Even if he is an inferior officer, the Attorney General
could appoint him without Presidential nomination and senatorial
confirmation only if “Congress . . . by law vest[ed] the
Appointment” in the Attorney General as a “Hea[d] of Department.”
Ibid. So, the Special Counsel’s appointment is invalid
unless a statute created the Special Counsel’s office and
gave the Attorney General the power to fill it “by Law.”

															Whether the Special Counsel’s office was
“established by Law” is not a trifling technicality. If Congress
has not reached a consensus that a particular office should exist,
the Executive lacks the power to unilaterally create and then fill
that office. Given that the Special Counsel purports to wield the
Executive Branch’s power to prosecute, the consequences are
weighty. Our Constitution’s separation of powers, including its
separation of the powers to create and fill offices, is “the
absolutely central guarantee of a just Government” and the liberty
that it secures for us all. Morrison, 487 U. S., at 697
(Scalia, J., dissenting). There is no prosecution that can justify
imperiling it.

															*  *  *

															In this case, there has been much discussion
about ensuring that a President “is not above the law.” But, as the
Court explains, the President’s immunity from prosecution for his
official acts is the law. The Constitution provides for “an
energetic executive,” because such an Executive is “essential to
. . . the security of liberty.” Ante, at 10
(internal quotation marks omitted). Respecting the protections that
the Constitution provides for the Office of the Presidency secures
liberty. In that same vein, the Constitution also secures liberty
by separating the powers to create and fill offices. And, there are
serious questions whether the Attorney General has violated that
structure by creating an office of the Special Counsel that has not
been established by law. Those questions must be answered before
this prosecution can proceed. We must respect the Constitution’s
separation of powers in all its forms, else we risk rendering its
protection of liberty a parchment guarantee.

Notes
1
 Although a Government
official may also be a “nonofficer employe[e],” I set aside that
category because it is difficult to see how an official exercising
the Department of Justice’s duties to enforce the criminal law by
leading a prosecution could be anything but an officer.
Lucia v. SEC, 585 U.S. 237, 253, n. 1 (2018)
(Thomas, J., concurring); see SW General, 580 U. S., at
314 (opinion of Thomas, J.). If the Special Counsel were a
nonofficer employee, the constitutional problems with this
prosecution would only be more serious. For now, I assume without
deciding that the Special Counsel is an officer.
2
 To be sure, a few
Presidents have appointed “special prosecutors” without pointing to
any express statutory authorization. See generally T. Eastland,
Ethics, Politics and the Independent Counsel 8–9 (1989) (describing
past uses of special prosecutors). But, this Court had no occasion
to review the constitutionality of those prosecutors’
authority.
3
 In fact, Congress gave
the Attorney General the power to appoint “additional officers
. . . as he deems necessary”—but, only for the Bureau of
Prisons. 18 U. S. C. §4041.
4
 Regulations remain on the
books that contemplate an “outside” Special Counsel, 28 CFR §600.1
(2023), but I doubt a regulation can create a federal office
without underlying statutory authority to do so.


