::decision_cite:: 23-939
::decision_name::  Trump v. United States
::decision_year:: 2024
::opinion_author:: Barrett
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 23–939

															_________________

															DONALD J. TRUMP, PETITIONER v. UNITED
STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states
court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit

															[July 1, 2024]

															

															Justice Barrett, concurring in part.

															For reasons I explain below, I do not join Part
III–C of the Court’s opinion. The remainder of the opinion is
consistent with my view that the Constitution prohibits Congress
from criminalizing a President’s exercise of core Article II powers
and closely related conduct. That said, I would have framed the
underlying legal issues differently. The Court describes the
President’s constitutional protection from certain prosecutions as
an “immunity.” As I see it, that term is shorthand for two
propositions: The President can challenge the constitutionality of
a criminal statute as applied to official acts alleged in the
indictment, and he can obtain interlocutory review of the trial
court’s ruling.

															There appears to be substantial agreement on the
first point. Like the Court, the dissenting Justices and the
Special Counsel all accept that some prosecutions of a President’s
official conduct may be unconstitutional. See post, at 16
(opinion of Sotomayor, J.); Brief for United States 24–30. As for
interlocutory review, our precedent recognizes that resolving
certain legal issues before trial is necessary to safeguard
important constitutional interests—here, Executive Branch
independence on matters that Article II assigns to the President’s
discretion.

															Properly conceived, the President’s
constitutional protection from prosecution is narrow. The Court
leaves open the possibility that the Constitution forbids
prosecuting the President for any official conduct,
instructing the lower courts to address that question in the first
instance. See ante, at 14. I would have answered it now.
Though I agree that a President cannot be held criminally liable
for conduct within his “conclusive and preclusive” authority and
closely related acts, ante, at 8–9, the Constitution does
not vest every exercise of executive power in the President’s sole
discretion, Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v.
Sawyer, 343 U.S.
579, 637 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring).[1] Congress has concurrent authority over many
Government functions, and it may sometimes use that authority to
regulate the President’s official conduct, including by criminal
statute. Article II poses no barrier to prosecution in such
cases.

															I would thus assess the validity of criminal
charges predicated on most official acts—i.e., those falling
outside of the President’s core executive power—in two steps. The
first question is whether the relevant criminal statute reaches the
President’s official conduct. Not every broadly worded statute
does. For example, §956 covers conspiracy to murder in a foreign
country and does not expressly exclude the President’s decision to,
say, order a hostage rescue mission abroad. 18 U. S. C.
§956(a). The underlying murder statute, however, covers only
“unlawful” killings. §1111. The Office of Legal Counsel has
interpreted that phrase to reflect a public-authority exception for
official acts involving the military and law enforcement.
Memorandum from D. Barron, Acting Assistant Atty. Gen., to E.
Holder, Atty. Gen., Re: Applicability of Federal Criminal Laws and
the Constitution to Contemplated Lethal Operations Against Shaykh
Anwar al-Aulaqi 12–19 (July 16, 2010); see also Brief for United
States 29–30; post, at 16, and n. 3 (Sotomayor, J.,
dissenting). I express no view about the merits of that
interpretation, but it shows that the threshold question of
statutory interpretation is a nontrivial step.

															If the statute covers the alleged official
conduct, the prosecution may proceed only if applying it in the
circumstances poses no “ ‘dange[r] of intrusion on the
authority and functions of the Executive Branch.’ ”
Ante, at 14 (quoting Nixon v. Fitzgerald,
457 U.S.
731, 754 (1982)). On remand, the lower courts will have to
apply that standard to various allegations involving the
President’s official conduct.[2] Some of those allegations raise unsettled questions
about the scope of Article II power, see ante, at 21–28, but
others do not. For example, the indictment alleges that the
President “asked the Arizona House Speaker to call the legislature
into session to hold a hearing” about election fraud claims. App.
193. The President has no authority over state legislatures or
their leadership, so it is hard to see how prose-

															cuting him for crimes committed when dealing
with the Arizona House Speaker would unconstitutionally intrude on
executive power.

															This two-step analysis—considering first whether
the statute applies and then whether its application to the
particular facts is constitutional—is similar to the approach that
the Special Counsel presses in this Court. Brief for United States
24–30. It is also our usual approach to considering the validity of
statutes in situations raising a constitutional question. See,
e.g., Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, 591 U.S. 197, 213, 229 (2020).[3] An important difference in this context is
that the President is entitled to an interlocutory appeal of the
trial court’s ruling. See ante, at 36. A criminal defendant
in federal court normally must wait until after trial to seek
review of the trial court’s refusal to dismiss charges. See
United States v. MacDonald, 435
U.S. 850, 853–854 (1978); see also 18 U. S. C. §3731.
But where trial itself threatens certain constitutional interests,
we have treated the trial court’s resolution of the issue as a
“final decision” for purposes of appellate jurisdiction.
MacDonald, 435 U. S., at 854–856; see 28
U. S. C. §1291; see also §1257.

															The present circumstances fall squarely within
our precedent authorizing interlocutory review. When a President
moves to dismiss an indictment on Article II grounds, he “makes no
challenge whatsoever to the merits of the charge against him.”
Abney v. United States, 431 U.S.
651, 659 (1977) (allowing interlocutory appeal of rejection of
double jeopardy defense). He instead contests whether the
Constitution allows Congress to criminalize the alleged conduct, a
question that is “collateral to, and separable from” his guilt or
innocence. Ibid. Moreover, the President’s Executive Branch
authority “would be significantly undermined if appellate review”
of the constitutional challenge “were postponed until after
conviction and sentence.” Id., at 660; see also
Helstoski v. Meanor, 442 U.S.
500, 507 (1979) (allowing interlocutory appeal of refusal to
dismiss an indictment on Speech or Debate Clause grounds). The
prospect of a trial court erroneously allowing the prosecution to
proceed poses a unique danger to the “independence of the Executive
Branch.” Trump v. Vance, 591 U.S. 786, 800 (2020). As
the Court explains, the possibility that the President will be made
to defend his official conduct before a jury after he leaves office
could distort his decisions while in office. Ante, at 13–14,
36. These Article II concerns do not insulate the President from
prosecution. But they do justify interlocutory review of the trial
court’s final decision on the President’s as-applied constitutional
challenge. See Helstoski, 442 U. S., at 507–508;
Abney, 431 U. S., at 659–661; see also Reply Brief for
United States in No. 23–624, p. 5 (agreeing that the President
“has a right to an interlocutory appeal from the district court’s
rejection of his immunity defense”).

															I understand most of the Court’s opinion to be
consistent with these views. I do not join Part III–C, however,
which holds that the Constitution limits the introduction of
protected conduct as evidence in a criminal prosecution of a
President, beyond the limits afforded by executive privilege. See
ante, at 30–32. I disagree with that holding; on this score,
I agree with the dissent. See post, at 25–27 (Sotomayor, J.,
dissenting). The Constitution does not require blinding juries to
the circumstances surrounding conduct for which Presidents
can be held liable. Consider a bribery prosecution—a charge
not at issue here but one that provides a useful example. The
federal bribery statute forbids any public official to seek or
accept a thing of value “for or because of any official act.” 18
U. S. C. §201(c). The Constitution, of course, does not
authorize a President to seek or accept bribes, so the Government
may prosecute him if he does so. See Art. II, §4 (listing
“Bribery” as an impeachable offense); see also Memorandum from L.
Silberman, Deputy Atty. Gen., to R. Burress, Office of the
President, Re: Conflict of Interest Problems Arising Out of the
President’s Nomination of Nelson A. Rockefeller To Be Vice
President Under the Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the Constitution 5
(Aug. 28, 1974) (suggesting that the federal bribery statute
applies to the President). Yet excluding from trial any mention of
the official act connected to the bribe would hamstring the
prosecution. To make sense of charges alleging a quid pro
quo, the jury must be allowed to hear about both the
quid and the quo, even if the quo, standing
alone, could not be a basis for the President’s criminal
liability.

															I appreciate the Court’s concern that allowing
into evidence official acts for which the President cannot be held
criminally liable may prejudice the jury. Ante, at 31. But
the rules of evidence are equipped to handle that concern on a
case-by-case basis. Most importantly, a trial court can exclude
evidence of the President’s protected conduct “if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by a danger of . . .
unfair prejudice” or “confusing the issues.” Fed. Rule Evid. 403;
see also Rule 105 (requiring the court to “restrict the evidence to
its proper scope and instruct the jury accordingly”). The balance
is more likely to favor admitting evidence of an official act in a
bribery prosecution, for instance, than one in which the protected
conduct has little connection to the charged offense. And if the
evidence comes in, the trial court can instruct the jury to
consider it only for lawful purposes. See Richardson v.
Marsh, 481 U.S.
200, 206–207 (1987). I see no need to depart from that familiar
and time-tested procedure here.

															

															*  *  *

															The Constitution does not insulate Presidents
from criminal liability for official acts. But any statute
regulating the exercise of executive power is subject to a
constitutional challenge. See, e.g., Collins
v. Yellen, 594 U.S. 220, 235–236 (2021); Zivotofsky
v. Clinton, 566 U.S.
189, 192–194 (2012); Free Enterprise Fund v. Public
Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U.S.
477, 487–488 (2010). A criminal statute is no exception. Thus,
a President facing prosecution may challenge the constitutionality
of a criminal statute as applied to official acts alleged in the
indictment. If that challenge fails, however, he must stand
trial.

Notes
1
 Consistent with our
separation of powers precedent, I agree with the Court that the
supervision and removal of appointed, high ranking Justice
Department officials falls within the President’s core executive
power. See Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, 591 U.S. 197, 213–215 (2020); ante, at 19–21. I
do not understand the Court to hold that all exercises of the Take
Care power fall within the core executive power. Cf. post,
at 24 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). I agree with the dissent that
the Constitution does not justify such an expansive view.
Ibid.
2
 This analysis is
unnecessary for allegations involving the President’s private
conduct because the Constitution offers no protection from
prosecution of acts taken in a private capacity. Ante, at
15. Sorting private from official conduct sometimes will be
difficult—but not always. Take the President’s alleged attempt to
organize alternative slates of electors. See, e.g.,
App. 208. In my view, that conduct is private and therefore not
entitled to protection. See post, at 27–28 (Sotomayor, J.,
dissenting). The Constitution vests power to appoint Presidential
electors in the States. Art. II, §1, cl. 2; see also
Chiafalo v. Washington, 591 U.S. 578, 588–589 (2020).
And while Congress has a limited role in that process, see Art. II,
§1, cls. 3–4, the President has none. In short, a President has no
legal authority—and thus no official capacity—to influence how the
States appoint their electors. I see no plausible argument for
barring prosecution of that alleged conduct.
3
 The Court has sometimes
applied an avoidance canon when inter-preting a statute that would
interfere with the President’s prerogatives. See, e.g.,
Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505
U.S. 788, 800–801 (1992); Public Citizen v. Dept. of
Justice, 491 U.S.
440, 465–467 (1989); see also Sale v. Haitian Centers
Council, Inc., 509 U.S.
155, 188 (1993). The Office of Legal Counsel has advocated for
a clear-statement rule if applying a statute would “raise serious
constitutional questions relating to the President’s constitutional
authority.” See Application of 28 U. S. C. §458 to
Presidential Appointments of Federal Judges, 19 Op. OLC 350,
350–357 (1995). In my view, neither canon applies in this
circumstance. Courts should instead determine the statute’s
ordinary meaning and, if it covers the alleged official acts,
assess whether prosecution would intrude on the President’s
constitutional authority. See Public Citizen, 491
U. S., at 481–482 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment)
(declining to apply the avoidance canon and concluding that the
Federal Advisory Committee Act is unconstitutional as
applied).


