::decision_cite:: 574 U.S. 293
::decision_name::  T-Mobile South, LLC v. City of Roswell
::decision_year:: 2015
::opinion_author:: Roberts
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 13–975

															_________________

															T-MOBILE SOUTH, LLC, PETITIONER v.CITY OF ROSWELL,
GEORGIA

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the eleventh circuit

															[January 14, 2015]

															Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins,
and with whom Justice Thomas joins as to Part I,
dissenting.

															The statute at issue in this case provides that “[a]ny decision
. . . to deny a request . . . shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record.”47 U. S. C. §332(c)(7)(B)(iii). The Court
concludes that the City loses this case not because it failed to
provide its denial in writing. It did provide its denial in
writing. Nor does the City lose because the denial was not
supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The City
compiled a written record; whether that record contained
substantial evidence supporting the denial is not at issue here and
has not been decided. Nor does the City lose because its denial was
not accompanied by a statement of reasons apart from the written
record. A sharp conflict had developed in the lower courts over the
necessity of such a separate statement, and the Court today
squarely holds that one is not required. Ante, at 5, 8–11.
No, the City instead loses because of a question of timing: The
written record was not made available roughly the same day as the
denial—a requirement found nowhere in the text of the statute.

															The Court says this timing requirement is necessary for judicial
review of whether the denial is supported by substantial evidence.
A reviewing court, however, can carry out its function just as
easily whether the record is submitted four weeks or four days
before the lawsuit is filed—or four days after, for that
matter. The Court also supports its timing rule by saying that the
company whose application is denied needs the time to carefully
consider whether to seek review. But cell service providers are not
Mom and Pop operations. As this case illustrates, they participate
extensively in the local government proceedings, and do not have to
make last-second, uninformed decisions on whether to seek
review.

															The City here fully complied with its obligations under the
statute: It issued its decision in writing, and it sub-mitted a
written record containing—so far as we know—substantial evidence
supporting that decision. I respectfully dissent from the Court’s
contrary conclusion.

															I

															Section 332(c)(7), enacted as part of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, places several limits on local governments’ authority to
regulate the siting of cell towers and other telecommunications
facilities. A locality’s regulations must not unreasonably
discriminate among service providers, effectively prohibit the
provision of service, or rest on concerns about the environmental
effects of radio emissions. See §§332(c)(7)(B)(i), (iv). In
addition, the provision central to this case specifies that “[a]ny
decision by a State or local government . . . to deny a
request to place, construct, or modify” a cell tower “shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record.” §332(c)(7)(B)(iii). And another provision
authorizes expedited judicial review of a locality’s alleged
failure to comply with these rules. See §332(c)(7)(B)(v).

															After the city council of Roswell voted to deny T-Mobile’s
application to build a cell tower, the City sent T-Mobile a short
letter that announced the denial but provided no further
explanation. The question T-Mobile has presented to this Court is
whether such a letter satisfies the “decision . . . in
writing” requirement of Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iii). See Pet. for
Cert. i.

															I would hold it does. The City’s letter was certainly in
writing. And it certainly memorialized the denial of T-Mobile’s
application. So T-Mobile’s only hope is that the lack of
explanation for the denial means the letter isnot truly a
“decision.” But like the majority, I reject T-Mobile’s contention
that the term “decision” inherently demands a statement of reasons.
Dictionary definitions support that conclusion. See ante, at
12 (citing Black’s Law Dictionary); see also B. Garner, A
Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage 251 (2d ed. 1995) (grouping
“decision” with “judgment,” as distinct from “opinion”).

															A comparison between Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iii) and other
statutory provisions that were on the books in 1996 also suggests
that when Congress wants decisionmakers to supply explanations, it
says so. Consider first the Administrative Procedure Act. In the
context of formal adjudication and rulemaking, it demands that
“decisions . . . include a statement of . . .
findings and conclusions, and the reasons or basis therefor,
on all the material issues.”5 U. S. C. §557(c)(A) (1994
ed.) (emphasis added). Even in informal proceedings, an agency must
give prompt notice of the denial of a written application, and,
“[e]xcept in affirming a prior denial or when the denial is
self-explanatory, the notice shall be accompanied by a brief
statement of the grounds for denial.” §555(e) (emphasis
added).

															The Communications Act of 1934, which the Telecommunications Act
overhauled, itself contains a similar express requirement. Section
309 allows an interested party to petition the Federal
Communications Commission to deny a license application.47
U. S. C. §309(d)(1) (1994 ed.). If the FCC decides to
grant an application despite such a petition, it must “issue a
concise statement of the reasons for denying the petition.”
§309(d)(2). And a provision added along with Section 332(c)(7) in
the Telecommunications Act provides that when the FCC grants or
denies a petition for regulatory forbearance, it “shall
explain its decision in writing.” §160(c) (2000 ed.)
(emphasis added). Many other statutes in effect in 1996 could be
added to the list. See, e.g., 19 U. S. C. §1515(a)
(1994 ed.) (notice of customs protest denial “shall include a
statement of the reasons for the denial”);30 U. S. C.
§944 (1994 ed.) (individual whose claim for black lung benefits “is
denied shall receive . . . a written statement of the
reasons for denial”);38 U. S. C. §5104(b) (1994 ed.)
(notice of denial of veterans benefits must include “a statement of
the reasons for the decision”).

															Given the commonplace nature of express requirements that
reasons be given—and the inclusion of such provisions in the
Administrative Procedure Act, the original Communications Act, and
another provision of the Telecommunications Act—the absence of one
in Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iii) is telling, and supports reading
“decision . . . in writing” to demand nothing more than
what it says: a written document that communicates the town’s
denial.

															In my view, resolving that interpretive question in the City’s
favor also resolves the case as it stands in this Court. Although
Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iii) goes on to require that a denial be
“supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record,”
the adequacy of the City’s written record is not properly before
us. As the Eleventh Circuit noted in its opinion below, the “sole
issue” before it was the “in writing” requirement; it did not
examine whether the City’s denial was supported by substantial
evidence. 731 F. 3d 1213, 1221, n. 7 (2013). The Court
today also—correctly—does not decide whether substantial evidence
supported the City’s denial. The Eleventh Circuit’s judgment
therefore ought to be affirmed and the case remanded to the
District Court for further proceedings on T-Mobile’s remaining
challenges.

															II

															The Court agrees that the City was not required to explain its
reasoning in its denial letter, but it nonetheless rules for
T-Mobile. The improbable linchpin of this outcome is the City’s
failure to finalize the minutes of the April 12 city council
meeting until May 10. Improbable because, so far as I can tell,
T-Mobile never even mentioned this timeline, let alone based an
argument on it, in its filings in the lower courts or its petition
for certiorari. Nor did the Eleventh Circuit address this timing
question in any way. Cf. Zivotofsky v. Clinton, 566
U. S. ___, ___ (2012) (slip op., at 12) (“Ordinarily, we do
not decide in the first instance issues not decided below.”
(internal quotation marks omitted)).

															The Court nonetheless rules against Roswell on this ground,
proceeding in two steps: First it concludes that a town must
provide written reasons in some form (the minutes being the
only candidate here); then it decides a town must make those
reasons available “essentially contemporaneously” with its decision
(the final minutes were not). Ante, at 14. In my view, the
first step is justified by the statutory text, but the second is
not.

															The need to provide reasons in some form follows from the
portion of Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iii) requiring that denials be
“supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.”
Like the majority, I read this phrase as specifying a familiar
standard of review to be used if a denial is challenged in court.
And like the majority, I agree that substantial evidence review
requires that a decisionmaker’s reasons be identifiable in the
written record. If a reviewing court cannot identify any of a
town’s reasons for denying an application, it cannot determine
whether substantial evidence supports those reasons, and the town
loses.

															But then the Court goes a step further and creates a timing
rule: A town must provide “its written reasons at essentially the
same time as it communicates its denial.” Ante, at 10. This
timing rule is nowhere to be found in the text of Section
332(c)(7)(B)—text that expressly establishes other time
limits, both general and specific. See §332(c)(7)(B)(ii) (requiring
localities to act on siting requests “within a reasonable period of
time”); §332(c)(7)(B)(v) (giving injured parties 30 days to seek
judicial review). Despite its assertion that the statute’s
“enumerated limitations” constitute “an exclusive list,”
ante, at 9, the Court offers two justifications for its
inference of this additional, unenumerated limitation.

															The first is that “a court cannot review the denial without
knowing the locality’s reasons,” so it would “stymie” judicial
review to allow delay between the issuance of the decision and the
statement of reasons. Ante, at 10. This makes little sense.
The Court’s “essentially contemporaneous” requirement presumably
means the town must produce its reasons within a matter of days
(though the majority never says how many). But a reviewing court
does not need to be able to discern the town’s reasons within mere
days of the decision. At that point no one has even asked the court
to review the denial. The fact that a court cannot conduct review
without knowing the reasons simply means that if the town has not
already made the record available, it must do so by whatever
deadline the court sets. The court should proceed “on an expedited
basis,” §332(c)(7)(B)(v), but that hardly means it will need the
record within days of the town’s decision. And in this case there
is no indication that the City’s submission of the written record
was untimely or delayed the District Court’s review.

															The Court’s second justification focuses on the denied
applicant, which must choose within 30 days from the denial whether
to take the town to court. §332(c)(7)(B)(v). “[W]ithout knowing the
locality’s reasons,” the majority says, the applicant “may not be
able to make a considered decision whether to seek judicial
review.” Ante, at 10. This concern might have force if towns
routinely made these decisions in secret, closed-door proceedings,
or if applicants were unsophisticated actors. But the local zoning
board or town council is not the Star Chamber, and a
telecommunications company is no babe in the legal woods. Almost
invariably in cases addressing Section 332(c)(7), the relevant
local authority has held an open meeting at which the applicant was
present and the issues publicly aired. In this case and others,
T-Mobile has brought its own court reporter, ensuring that it has a
verbatim transcript of the meeting well before the town is likely
to finalize its minutes. See Brief for Petitioner 12, n. 2;
T-Mobile South, LLC v. City of Milton, Georgia, 728
F. 3d 1274, 1277 (CA11 2013). I strongly doubt that a
sophisticated, well-lawyered company like T-Mobile—with extensive
experience with these particular types of proceedings—would have
any trouble consulting its interests and deciding whether to seek
review before it had received a written explanation from the town.
The Court worries about towns “sandbagg[ing]” companies with
unexpected reasons, ante, at 10, n. 3, but if those
reasons in fact come out of nowhere, they will not be supported by
substantial evidence in the record. And if the company’s initial
complaint mistakes the town’s reasoning, the company will have no
difficulty amending its allegations. See Fed. Rule Civ. Proc.
15(a).

															In sum, there is nothing impractical about reading the statutory
text to require only that the reasons implied by the term
“substantial evidence” be discernible to the court when it conducts
substantial evidence review. Demanding “essentially
contemporaneous” written reasons adds a requirement that Congress
has included expressly in many other statutes, but not in this one.
See supra, at3–4.

															*  *  *

															For the foregoing reasons, the Court’s opinion and judgment are
wrong. But this is not a “the sky is falling” dissent. At the end
of the day, the impact on cities and towns across the Nation should
be small, although the new unwritten requirement could be a trap
for the unwary hamlet or two. All a local government need do is
withhold its final decision until the minutes are typed up, and
make the final decision and the record of proceedings (with
discernible reasons) available together.

															Today’s decision is nonetheless a bad break for Roswell. Or
maybe not. The Court leaves open the question of remedy,
ante, at 14, and it may be that failure to comply with the
“in writing” requirement as construed by the Court can be excused
as harmless error in appropriate cases. It is hard to see where the
harm is here. T-Mobile somehow managed to make the tough call to
seek review of the denial of an application it had spent months and
many thousands of dollars to obtain, based on a hearing it had
attended. And nothing about Roswell’s failure to meet the
“contemporaneously” requirement delayed, much less “stymied,”
judicial review.

															The Court today resolves the conflict over whether a town must
provide a statement of reasons with its final decision, apart from
the written record. We now know it need not. As the Court explains,
“nothing in [the] text [of the Act] imposes any requirement that
the reasons be given in any particular form,” and there is “in the
Act no command—either explicit or implicit—that localities must
provide those reasons in a specific document.” Ante, at 9.
Good analysis—which also should have been followed to reject the
timing requirement the Court creates today.

															I respectfully dissent.

													
