::decision_cite:: 574 U.S. 54
::decision_name::  Heien v. North Carolina
::decision_year:: 2014
::opinion_author:: Kagan
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 13–604

															_________________

															NICHOLAS BRADY HEIEN, PETITIONER v. NORTH CAROLINA

															on writ of certiorari to the supreme court of north carolina

															[December 15, 2014]

															Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, concurring.

															I concur in full in the Court’s opinion, which explains why
certain mistakes of law can support the reasonable suspicion needed
to stop a vehicle under the Fourth Amendment. In doing so, the
Court correctly emphasizes that the “ Fourth Amendment tolerates
only . . . objectively reasonable” mistakes of
law. Ante, at 11. And the Court makes clear that the inquiry
into whether an officer’s mistake of law counts as objectively
reasonable “is not as forgiving as the one employed in the distinct
context of deciding whether an officer is entitled to qualified
immunity.” Ibid. I write separately to elaborate briefly on
those important limitations.[1]

															First, an officer’s “subjective understanding” is irrelevant: As
the Court notes, “[w]e do not examine” it at all. Ibid. That
means the government cannot defend an officer’s mistaken legal
interpretation on the ground that the officer was unaware of or
untrained in the law. And it means that, contrary to the dissenting
opinion in the court below, an officer’s reliance on “an incorrect
memo or training program from the police department” makes no
difference to the analysis. 366 N. C. 271, 284, 737 S. E.
2d 351, 360 (2012) (Hudson, J., dissenting). Those considerations
pertain to the officer’s subjective understanding of the law and
thus cannot help to justify a seizure.

															Second, the inquiry the Court permits today is more demanding
than the one courts undertake before awarding qualified immunity.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 51 (Solicitor General stating that the two
tests “require essentially the opposite” showings); Brief for
Respondent 31–32 (making a similar point). Our modern qualified
immunity doctrine protects “all but the plainly incompetent or
those who knowingly violate the law.” Ashcroft v.
al-Kidd, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 12)
(quoting Malley v. Briggs,475 U. S. 335,341
(1986)). By contrast, Justice Story’s opinion in The
Friendship, 9 F. Cas. 825, 826 (No. 5,125) (CC Mass. 1812)
(cited ante, at 7), suggests the appropriate standard for
deciding when a legal error can support a seizure: when an officer
takes a reasonable view of a “vexata questio” on which different
judges “h[o]ld opposite opinions.” See Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 26 (invoking that language). Or to make the
same point without the Latin, the test is satisfied when the law at
issue is “so doubtful in construction” that a reasonable judge
could agree with the officer’s view. The Friendship, 9
F. Cas., at 826.

															A court tasked with deciding whether an officer’s mistake of law
can support a seizure thus faces a straightforward question of
statutory construction. If the statute is genuinely ambiguous, such
that overturning the officer’s judgment requires hard interpretive
work, then the officer has made a reasonable mistake. But if not,
not. As the Solicitor General made the point at oral argument, the
statute must pose a “really difficult” or “very hard question of
statutory interpretation.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 50. And indeed, both
North Carolina and the Solicitor General agreed that such cases
will be “exceedingly rare.” Brief for Respondent 17; Tr. of Oral
Arg. 48.

															The Court’s analysis of Sergeant Darisse’s interpretation of the
North Carolina law at issue here appropriately reflects these
principles. As the Court explains, see ante, at
12–13, the statute requires every car on the highway to have
“a stop lamp,” in the singular. N. C. Gen. Stat. Ann.
§20–129(g) (2007). But the statute goes on to state that a stop
lamp (or, in more modern terminology, brake light) “may be
incorporated into a unit with one or more other rear lamps,”
suggesting that a stop lamp itself qualifies as a rear lamp.
Ibid. (emphasis added). And the statute further mandates
that every car have “all originally equipped rear lamps
. . . in good working order.” §20–129(d) (emphasis
added). The North Carolina Court of Appeals dealt with the
statute’s conflicting signals in one way (deciding that a brake
light is not a rear lamp, and so only one needs to work);
but a court could easily take the officer’s view (deciding that a
brake light is a rear lamp, and if a car comes equipped with
more than one, as modern cars do, all must be in working order).
The critical point is that the statute poses a quite difficult
question of interpretation, and Sergeant Darisse’s judgment,
although overturned, had much to recommend it. I therefore agree
with the Court that the traffic stop he conducted did not violate
the Fourth Amendment.

Notes
1 I note in addition, as does the
Court, that one kind of mistaken legal judgment—an error about the
contours of the Fourth Amendment itself—can never support a search
or seizure. See ante, at 10 (“An officer’s mistaken view
that” conduct does “not give rise to” a Fourth Amendment
violation, “no matter how reasonable,” cannot change a court’s
“ultimate conclusion” that such a violation has occurred). As the
Solicitor General has explained, mistakes about the requirements of
the Fourth Amendment “violate the Fourth Amendment even when they
are reasonable.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae
30, n. 3; see Brief for Respondent 29 (stating the same
view).


