::decision_cite:: 574 U.S. 528
::decision_name::  Yates v. United States
::decision_year:: 2015
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															No. 13–7451

															_________________

															JOHN L. YATES, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES

															on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
the eleventh circuit

															[February 25, 2015]

															Justice Alito, concurring in the judgment.

															This case can and should be resolved on narrow grounds. And
though the question is close, traditional tools of statutory
construction confirm that John Yates has the better of the
argument. Three features of18 U. S. C. §1519 stand out to
me: the statute’s list of nouns, its list of verbs, and its title.
Although perhaps none of these features by itself would tip the
case in favor of Yates, the three combined do so.

															Start with the nouns. Section 1519 refers to “any record,
document, or tangible object.” The noscitur a sociis canon
instructs that when a statute contains a list, each word in that
list presumptively has a “similar” meaning. See, e.g.,
Gustafson v. Alloyd Co.,513 U. S. 561,576 (1995). A
related canon, ejusdem generis teaches that general words
following a list of specific words should usually be read in light
of those specific words to mean something “similar.” See, e.g.,
Christopher v. SmithKline Beecham Corp., 567 U. S.
___, ___ (2012) (slip op., at 18). Applying these canons to §1519’s
list of nouns, the term “tangible object” should refer to something
similar to records or documents. A fish does not spring to mind—nor
does an antelope, a colonial farmhouse, a hydrofoil, or an oil
derrick. All are “objects” that are “tangible.” But who wouldn’t
raise an eyebrow if a neighbor, when asked to identify something
similar to a “record” or “document,” said “crocodile”?

															This reading, of course, has its shortcomings. For instance,
this is an imperfect ejusdem generis case because “record”
and “document” are themselves quite general. And there is a risk
that “tangible object” may be made superfluous—what is similar to a
“record” or “document” but yet is not one? An e-mail, however,
could be such a thing. See United States Sentencing Commission,
Guidelines Manual §2J1.2 and comment. (Nov. 2003) (reading
“records, documents, or tangible objects” to “includ[e]” what is
found on “magnetic, optical, digital, other electronic,or other
storage mediums or devices”). An e-mail, afterall, might not be a
“document” if, as was “traditionally” so, a document was a “piece
of paper with information on it,” not “information stored on a
computer, electronic storage device, or any other medium.” Black’s
Law Dictionary 587–588 (10th ed. 2014). E-mails might also not be
“records” if records are limited to “minutes” or other formal
writings “designed to memorialize [past] events.” Id., at
1465. A hard drive, however, is tangible and can contain files that
are precisely akin to even these narrow definitions. Both “record”
and “document” can be read more expansively, but adding “tangible
object” to §1519 would ensure beyond question that electronic files
are included. To be sure, “tangible object” presumably can capture
more than just e-mails; Congress enacts “catchall[s]” for “known
unknowns.” Republic of Iraq v. Beaty,556 U. S.
848,860 (2009). But where noscitur a sociis and ejusdem
generis apply, “known unknowns” should be similar to known
knowns, i.e., here, records and documents. This is
especially true because reading “tangible object” too broadly could
render “record” and “document” superfluous.

															Next, consider §1519’s list of verbs: “alters, destroys,
mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry
in.” Although many of those verbs could apply to nouns as far-flung
as salamanders, satellites, or sand dunes, the last phrase in the
list—“makes a false entry in”—makes no sense outside of
filekeeping. How does one make a false entry in a fish? “Alters”
and especially “falsifies” are also closely associated with
filekeeping. Not one of the verbs, moreover, cannot be
applied to filekeeping—certainly not in the way that “makes a false
entry in” is always inconsistent with the aquatic.

															Again, the Government is not without a response. One can imagine
Congress trying to write a law so broadly that not every verb lines
up with every noun. But failure to “line up” may suggest that
something has gone awry in one’s interpretation of a text. Where,
as here, each of a statute’s verbs applies to a certain category of
nouns, there is some reason to think that Congress had that
category in mind. Categories, of course, are often underinclusive
or overinclusive—§1519, for instance, applies to a bomb-threatening
letter but not a bomb. But this does not mean that categories are
not useful or that Congress does not enact them. See, e.g.,
Vance v. Bradley,440 U. S. 93–109 (1979). Here,
focusing on the verbs, the category of nouns appears to be
filekeeping. This observation is not dispositive, but neither is it
nothing. The Government also contends that §1519’s verbs cut both
ways because it is unnatural to apply “falsifies” to tangible
objects, and that is certainly true. One does not falsify the
outside casing of a hard drive, but one could falsify or alter data
physically recorded on that hard drive.

															Finally, my analysis is influenced by §1519’s title:
“Destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in
Federal investigations and bankruptcy.” (Emphasis added.) This too
points toward filekeeping, not fish. Titles can be useful devices
to resolve “ ‘doubt about the meaning of a statute.’ ”
Porter v. Nussle,534 U. S. 516–528 (2002)
(quoting Almendarez-Torres v. United States,523
U. S. 224,234 (1998)); see also Lawson v. FMR
LLC, 571 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2014) (Sotomayor, J.,
dissenting) (slip op., at 4–6). The title is especially valuable
here because it reinforces what the text’s nouns and verbs
independently suggest—that no matter how other statutes might be
read, this particular one does not cover every noun in the universe
with tangible form.

															Titles, of course, are also not dispositive. Here, if the list
of nouns did not already suggest that “tangible object” should mean
something similar to records or documents, especially when read in
conjunction with §1519’s peculiar list of verbs with their focus on
filekeeping, then the title would not be enough on its own. In
conjunction with those other two textual features, however, the
Government’s argument, though colorable, becomes too implausible to
accept. See, e.g., Washington State Dept. of Social and
Health Servs. v. Guardianship Estate of Keffeler,537
U. S. 371–385 (2003) (focusing on the “product of [two] canons
of construction” which was “confirmed” by other interpretative
evidence); cf. Al-Adahi v. Obama, 613 F. 3d
1102, 1105–1106 (CADC 2010) (aggregating evidence).

													
